Academic Editor: Douglas
O’Shaughnessy
Received: 11 January 2026
Revised: 3 February 2026
Accepted: 3 February 2026
Published: 9 February 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
Data-Driven Event-Triggered Predictive Control for Consensus of
Discrete-Time Multi-Agent Systems with Time-Varying Delays
Chang-Jiang Li
 , Weifeng Xu
 , Liang Qi *
 , Zhaoping Du
 , Jianzhen Li
 and Shuxia Ye
School of Automation, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang 212100, China;
changjiang.li@hit.edu.cn (C.-J.L.); xuweifeng1119@stu.just.edu.cn (W.X.); duzhaoping98@163.com (Z.D.)
* Correspondence: alfred_02030210@just.edu.cn
Abstract
Consensus control for discrete-time multi-agent systems is increasingly complex when
facing unknown dynamics and time-varying communication delays. Although data-driven
control has emerged as a powerful tool to bypass model reliance, few existing studies
simultaneously address the challenges of delay compensation and limited communication
bandwidth. To bridge this gap, this paper proposes a novel data-driven event-triggered
predictive control framework. We leverage Willems’ fundamental lemma to construct a
predictive model directly from historical data, eliminating the need for system identifica-
tion. Furthermore, an integrated event-triggered mechanism with a dynamic threshold
updates control signals only when necessary, effectively reducing transmission load. Theo-
retical analysis confirms the recursive feasibility and stability of the closed-loop system,
while simulations demonstrate that the proposed method achieves robust consensus with
significantly reduced event-triggering frequency.
Keywords: time-varying; data-driven; event-triggered; predictive control; consensus
1. Introduction
Communication delays significantly alter multi-agent system states and can induce
complex dynamics. Olfati-Saber studied distributed consensus control in multi-agent
systems with directed networks, analyzing protocols for fixed/switching topologies and
time-delays while establishing connections between algebraic connectivity and system per-
formance [1]. Li established necessary and sufficient conditions for consensus in first-order
discrete-time multi-agent systems with communication delays, fully characterizing the
exact consensus region in the step-size and delay parameter space [2]. Ma D. developed a
MID-based PID control for first-order unstable delayed systems, ensuring guaranteed decay
rate, steady-state tracking, and maximum delay robustness through a pseudo-concave
optimization [3]. Wang proposed an event-triggered consensus control strategy for second-
order multi-agent systems with actuator saturation and input delay, achieving exponential
consensus via Lyapunov–Krasovskii methods and LMI-based stability analysis [4]. Ma Q.
established the exact delay margin guaranteeing consensus in second-order multi-agent
systems under delayed PI control and characterizes the switching behavior between consen-
sus and non-consensus with increasing delay [5]. Yang addressed distributed optimization
for continuous-time multi-agent systems with time-varying communication delays by
establishing the relationship between optimal solutions and system equilibria, deriving
both delay-dependent and delay-independent convergence conditions, and proposing a
sampled-data communication scheme for fast-varying delays, with the theoretical results
Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 2 of 20
supported by simulations and an application [6]. While advancements in electronic hard-
ware continue to reduce signal transmission latency, physical delays remain inevitable
in large-scale networked systems. Consequently, control-theoretic approaches, such as
Event-Triggered Mechanisms (ETMs) and Model Predictive Control (MPC), have become
indispensable for actively compensating for these time-varying delays at the algorith-
mic level.
With the advancement of electronic information technologies, computer science, and ar-
tificial intelligence, the application domains of coordinated control in multi-agent systems
have been expanding, while data-driven control strategies are continuously evolving and
being updated. Bu proposed a distributed model-free adaptive control method for data-
driven consensus tracking of multi-agent systems with unknown nonlinear dynamics
under fixed and switching topologies, using only input–output data without requiring
model information [7]. Zhou developed two data-driven optimal synchronization control
algorithms for leader-follower multiagent systems with unknown dynamics and distur-
bances, using output error and input data, respectively, to achieve output synchronization
while minimizing errors and rejecting disturbances [ 8]. Zhang proposed a data-driven
distributed optimal consensus control method for multi-agent systems with input delays,
using a model reduction approach to transform the delayed system into a delay-free form
and adopting neural networks to learn control policies online via adaptive dynamic pro-
gramming [9]. Li proposed a data-driven optimal output cluster synchronization control
method for heterogeneous multi-agent systems with disturbances, using adaptive dynamic
programming and a distributed adaptive observer to achieve synchronization without
knowledge of system matrices [10]. Huang proposed a model-free distributed predictive
control scheme for nonlinear multi-agent systems under communication delays, which
actively compensates for delays by introducing a consensus-based auxiliary variable and
employing dynamic linearization to design a distributed controller, with its stability and
effectiveness verified by analysis and simulation [11].
Event-triggered control improves the consistency and efficiency of multi-agent sys-
tems while ensuring the operational quality of the system by updating control signals.
Dou systematically reviewed event-triggered control for multi-agent systems, focusing
on reducing resource consumption, excluding Zeno behavior, and advances in finite-time,
fixed-time, and prescribed-time event-triggered consensus strategies [12]. Yang proposed
an event-triggered secure consensus control scheme for multi-agent systems under inde-
pendent multi-channel DoS attacks, establishing sufficient conditions on attack duration
and ensuring stability while excluding Zeno behavior [ 13]. Liu investigated consensus
for multi-agent systems with general linear dynamics using an adaptive dynamic event-
triggered strategy that relies only on event-triggered information to reduce communication
and exclude Zeno behavior [14]. Dong proposed an event-triggered differentially private
optimal consensus algorithm to protect agents’ state and cost function privacy during com-
putation while maintaining consensus and optimizing performance [15]. Zhang studied an
adaptive event-triggered control strategy for leader-following consensus of non-strict feed-
back multi-agent systems subject to unknown disturbances and full-state constraints [16].
Zhang studied consensus of multi-agent systems with time-varying delays using an event-
triggered delayed impulsive control strategy, establishing sufficient conditions under both
continuous and periodic event-triggered mechanisms [ 17]. Milad Abbasi proposed an
observer-based asynchronous periodic event-triggered control scheme to achieve consen-
sus in linear multi-agent systems under time-varying communication delays, employing
a bank of observers to reduce communication load and deriving LMI-based stability con-
ditions, with effectiveness validated through simulations and experiments on e-puck2
robots [18].
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 3 of 20
Distributed model predictive control has become one of the main methods for solving
the coordination problems of multi-agent systems due to its ability to enable agents to
estimate the future dynamic behaviors of their neighbors and achieve optimal control
performance for constrained systems. Cheng addressed the discrete-time double-integrator
consensus problem for multi-agent systems with directed switching proximity topologies
and input constraints via model predictive control protocols that ensure stable consensus
under directed spanning tree conditions [19]. Pang proposed an incremental networked
predictive control scheme for linear heterogeneous multi-agent systems subject to random
delays and packet dropouts, achieving stable cooperative output tracking with zero steady-
state error even under plant-model mismatch [20]. Matthias Köhler studied a distributed
MPC framework for constrained heterogeneous nonlinear multi-agent systems, achieving
cooperative objectives through local optimization of artificial references with guaranteed
feasibility and stability [21]. Liu proposed a high-order fully actuated (HOFA) predictive
coordination method for networked nonlinear multi-agent systems with communication
delays, achieving simultaneous stability and consensus while actively compensating for
delays [22]. Su proposed a robust distributed model predictive control scheme for consensus
tracking of linear multi-agent systems under additive disturbances and time-varying delays,
utilizing a Lyapunov-Razumikhin-based terminal constraint set and LMI conditions to
guarantee recursive feasibility and input-to-state stability, with an illustrative example
verifying the approach [23].
Research on multi-agent consensus is one of the key issues, and a solid foundation has
been established in this area. This paper will also build upon this foundation for further
discussion. Yang studies output consensus of heterogeneous linear multi-agent systems
on directed graphs using a predictive event-triggered mechanism with internal reference
models, significantly reducing communication costs while excluding Zeno behavior [24].
Liu proposed an event-triggered predictive consensus protocol for linear discrete-time
multi-agent systems with norm-bounded parameter uncertainties, achieving consensus
via local state monitoring and excluding Zeno behavior under LMI-based conditions [25].
Yin investigated a distributed adaptive event-triggered predictive control protocol for
discrete-time multi-agent systems with communication delays, reducing network burden
and actively compensating delays via a switched time-delay system formulation solvable
via linear matrix inequalities [26]. Qin proposed synchronous and asynchronous distributed
model predictive control algorithms for optimal output consensus of high-order multi-
agent systems, allowing uncoordinated step-sizes and achieving convergence without
global synchronization requirements [27]. Tang proposed an event-triggered distributed
model predictive control (DMPC) approach for dynamically decoupled systems with
coupled objectives, utilizing compatibility constraints and a stability-based triggering
condition to reduce communication while preserving feasibility and stability [ 28]. The
main contributions of this article are as follows:
(1) This paper proposes a novel framework that integrates data-driven, event-triggered,
and predictive control techniques to address the consensus problem for discrete-time
multi-agent systems with time-varying communication delays.
(2) Leveraging Willems’ fundamental lemma, the proposed controller design relies solely
on a pre-collected dataset of system trajectories, eliminating the need for an explicit
system model. This makes the approach suitable for systems with unknown or
complex dynamics.
(3) Rigorous theoretical analysis guarantees the framework’s Zeno-free behavior, the re-
cursive feasibility of the control law, and the asymptotic stability of the closed-loop
system, ensuring consensus is achieved.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 4 of 20
(4) The effectiveness of the method is validated through simulations, which also reveal
the dual impact of the prediction horizon (NP); a longer horizon not only enhances
control performance (e.g., faster convergence) but also significantly reduces the total
number of event triggers, thereby lowering communication overhead.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides some preliminaries. Section 3
gives the mathematical derivation and main results. Numerical examples and experimental
verifications are proposed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the article.
2. Preliminaries
Given a nonnegative adjacency matrix A ∈ R≥ 0N×N, the associated directed graph
is denoted by G = ( V, E, A), where V = 1, 2, . . . ,N is the vertex set and E ⊆ V × V
represents the set of directed edges such that (i, j) ∈ E iff aij > 0. The Laplacian matrix
L of the graph G is defined as L = D − A, where D = diag(d1, d2, . . ., dN) is the degree
matrix with di = ∑N
j=1 aij. A fundamental property of L is that it possesses a zero row
sum, i.e., L1N = 0N, where 1N and 0N denote the N-dimensional all-one and all-zero
vectors, respectively.
The graph G is said to contain a directed spanning tree if there exists at least one root
vertex from which every other vertex is reachable via a directed path. Given a collection
of directed graphs G1, G2, . . . ,Gk sharing the same vertex set V, their union is defined as
the directed graph with vertex set V and edge set given byS i = 1kEi. ∥ · ∥ represents the
corresponding Euclidean norm. In ∈ Rn×n denotes an n × n-dimensional identity matrix.
3. Main Results
3.1. Event-Triggered Design
Consider a discrete-time multi-agent system composed of N agents. The dynamics of
each agent is described by the following second-order model:
xi(k + 1) = xi(k) + hvi(k)
vi(k + 1) = vi(k) + hui(k)
(1)
where xi(k) ∈ R are the position variable of thei-th agent, vi(k) ∈ R are the velocity variable
of the i-th agent and ui(k) ∈ R are the control input of the i-th agent. The parameter h is
the sampling period of the discrete-time system.
The Laplacian matrix of the graph G(A(k)) is denoted by L(k). To ensure consensus
in system (1) under time-varying delays, a control protocol is formulated using relative
position and velocity measurements:
ui(k) = − ∑
j∈Ni
aij (k)

α(xi(k − τ(k)) − xj(k − τ(k)))
+ (vi(k − τ(k)) − vj(k − τ(k)))
 (2)
where Ni denotes the set of neighbors of agent i, α > 0 is a control gain, and τ(k) is a
time-varying unknown but bounded communication delay satisfying
0 ≤ τ(k) ≤ τmax (3)
in which 0 and τmax represent the known lower and upper bounds of the delay, respectively.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 5 of 20
This paper aims to develop an event-triggered control strategy to achieve consensus
in system (1) from any initial condition.
lim
k→∞
∥xi(k) − xj(k)∥ = 0
lim
k→∞
∥vi(k) − vj(k)∥ = 0
(4)
for all i, j ∈ {1, 2,· · · , N}
To reduce unnecessary communication, an event-triggered mechanism is introduced in
this paper. Under this mechanism, each agent i broadcasts its current state to its neighbors
only when a specific triggering condition is satisfied. The discrete time instants at which
these triggers occur form a sequence. The timestamp of the s-th event trigger for agent i is
denoted by ti
s, and thus the complete sequence of its triggering instants can be represented
as{ti
1, ti
2, · · · , ti
s}.
Between two consecutive triggering instants (e.g., ti
s and ti
s+1), that is, for k ∈
ti
s, ti
s+1 − 1

, agent i’s neighbors continuously use the state information broadcast at time
ti
s. To mathematically formalize this, the latest triggering instant at any time step k is
defined as follows:
ˆki(k) ≜ max
s∈N+
{ti
s|ti
s ≤ k} (5)
To streamline the subsequent derivation, the symbolˆki is substituted for ˆki(k). The mea-
surement error of agent i at time k is defined as the difference between its current state and
the most recent state:
ex,i(k) = xi(ˆki) − xi(k)
ev,i(k) = vi(ˆki) − vi(k)
(6)
Let ˆxi(k) = xi(ˆki) and ˆvi(k) = vi(ˆki). Under the event-triggered mechanism, control
protocol (2) is modified to
ui(k) = − ∑
j∈Ni
aij (k)

α( ˆxi(k − τ(k)) − ˆxj(k − τ(k)))
+ ( ˆvi(k − τ(k)) − ˆvj(k − τ(k)))
 (7)
The local neighborhood error for agent i is defined as follows:
ζi(k) = − ∑
j∈Ni
aij (k)

α(xi(k) − xj(k)) + (vi(k) − vj(k))

(8)
To formulate a fully distributed triggering condition that relies only on locally available
information, it defines an estimated neighborhood error based on the last broadcasted
states from neighbors:
ˆζi(k) = − ∑
j∈Ni
aij (k)

α( ˆxi(k) − ˆxj(k)) + ( ˆvi(k) − ˆvj(k))

(9)
The measurement error vector is defined as
ei(k) =
h
αeT
x,i(k) eT
v,i(k)
iT
(10)
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 6 of 20
The sequence of triggering instants {ti
s} is recursively generated according to the
following rule. Given the s-th triggering instant ti
s, the next triggering instant ti
s+1 is
determined as follows:
ti
s+1 = min
n
k > ti
s | fi(k) > 0
o
(11)
where the event-triggering function fi(k) is designed as follows:
fi(k) = ∥ei(k)∥2 − σi∥ ˆζi(k − τ(k))∥2 − ciρk (12)
and 0 < σi < 1 is an adjustable parameter, ci > 0 is a positive constant, and ρ ∈ (0, 1)
denotes a decay rate.
It is important to clarify how the system ensures the validity of the control signals
despite relying on discontinuous updates. The use of the last broadcast state ˆxj(k) effec-
tively functions as a Zero-Order Hold (ZOH) mechanism for inter-agent communication.
Although this introduces a discrepancy (defined as the measurement error ei(k)) between
the broadcast value and the actual real-time state, this error is not arbitrary. The correctness
of the scheme is actively guaranteed by the event-triggering condition (12). This condition
serves as a dynamic bounding constraint: it enforces that the measurement error ei(k) re-
mains strictly within a permissible range governed by the threshold functionσi|| ˆζi||2 + ciρk.
Consequently, the information used by neighbors is mathematically guaranteed to be a
sufficiently accurate approximation of the true state to maintain system stability, as any
deviation exceeding this safety margin will instantaneously trigger a state update.
It is worth noting that the event-triggering threshold is not a fixed constant but a
dynamically vanishing quantity, which is crucial for achieving asymptotic consensus rather
than merely bounded consensus. The threshold consists of two components: a state-
dependent term, σi∥ ˆζi(k − τ(k))∥2, and a time-dependent term ciρk. As the closed-loop
system stabilizes, the neighborhood consensus error ˆζi converges to zero, causing the
state-dependent term to vanish. Simultaneously, the time-dependent term deterministically
decays to zero as k → ∞ due to ρ ∈ (0, 1). This vanishing threshold design compels the
measurement error ei(k) to also converge to zero, thereby enabling the system to achieve
precise asymptotic consensus.
Theorem 1. The parameters of the event-triggered mechanism are chosen within the following
ranges: ci > 0, ρ ∈ (0, 1), ensuring that the system can avoid Zeno behavior.
Proof of Theorem 1. There exists a positive lower bound on the time interval between ti
s
and ti
s+1.
Let Ti
s = ti
s+1 − ti
s denote the inter-event time between the s-th triggering instants of
agent i. It is necessary to prove that there exists a constant Tmin > 0, independent of s and i,
such that Ti
s > Tmin for all s,i.
Consider an arbitrary triggering instant, denoted aski
s. By definition, the measurement
error is reset to zero at this instant, i.e., ei(ti
s) = 0. To analyze the evolution of the error
between two consecutive triggering instants ti
s and ti
s+1, it considers any time step k
satisfying ti
s ≤ k ≤ ti
s+1 − 1. Within this specific interval, the value of the latest triggering
instant ˆki for the error terms ei(k) and ei(k + 1) remains fixed at ti
s. Consequently, the one-
step difference of the error can be analyzed as follows:
At any time instant k > ti
s, consider the one-step difference of the error vector:
ei(k + 1) − ei(k) =
"
α(ex,i(k + 1) − ex,i(k))
ev,i(k + 1) − ev,i(k)
#
(13)
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 7 of 20
The validity of the following one-step error derivation is restricted to the interval be-
tween two triggering instants. Specifically, for any time stepk within the range

ti
s, ti
s+1 − 1

,
the latest triggering instant used to define the error is invariant and equal to ti
s. Based
on Definition (6) of the measurement error and System (1), the following expression can
be derived:
ex,i(k + 1) − ex,i(k) =( xi(ti
s) − xi(k + 1)) − (xi(ti
s) − xi(k))
=xi(k) − xi(k + 1) − hvi(k)
ev,i(k + 1) − ev,i(k) =( vi(ti
s) − vi(k + 1)) − (vi(ti
s) − vi(k))
=vi(k) − vi(k + 1) − hui(k)
(14)
The error vector can be represented in the form of
ei(k + 1) = ei(k) − h
"
αvi(k)
ui(k)
#
(15)
By applying the triangle inequality, an upper bound on the norm can be obtained
as follows:
∥ei(k + 1)∥ ≤ ∥ ei(k)∥ + h

"
αvi(k)
ui(k)
# (16)
The existence of this bound is guaranteed by the controller design itself: the inputui(k)
is inherently bounded by constraint (C2) in (25), which, for a finite initial state, ensures
the state trajectory remains bounded over any finite time interval, including

ti
s, ti
s+1

.
This implies that there exists a positive constant Mi such that for all k, the following
inequality holds:
h

"
αvi(k)
ui(k)
# ≤ Mi (17)
Beginning at k = ki
s, ∥ei(ti
s)∥ = 0, successive application of the above inequality over
∆k iterations yields the following:
∥ei(ki
s + ∆k)∥ ≤
∆k−1
∑
i=0
Mi = ∆k · Mi (18)
The next triggering instant ki
s+1 is defined as the first time instant after ti
s at which the
triggering condition is satisfied. According to the triggering function fi(k), this condition is
given by the following:
∥ei(k)∥2 > σi∥ ˆζi(k − τ(k))∥2 + ciρk (19)
At the triggering instant ti
s+1, the following condition must be satisfied: ∥ei(ti
s+1)∥2 >
ciρti
s+1
Let ∆k = Ti
s = ti
s+1 − ti
s. By integrating the above-derived upper bound on the error
growth, it follows that
(∆k · Mi)2 ≥ ∥ei(ti
s + ∆k)∥2 = ∥ei(ti
s+1)∥2 > ciρti
s+1 (20)
A lower bound for ∆k can be explicitly solved:
∆k >
q
ciρti
s+1
Mi
(21)
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 8 of 20
Since ci > 0 and ρ ∈ (0, 1), the right-hand side remains strictly positive. Consequently,
the minimum time interval between two consecutive triggering events, denoted by Tmin, is
strictly greater than zero. This guarantees that the number of triggering events within any
finite time period is finite, thereby effectively excluding Zeno behavior.
3.2. Data-Driven Predictive Model Construction
The primary predictive technique employed in this study is a Data-Driven Model
Predictive Control (DDMPC) framework, mathematically founded on Willems’ Funda-
mental Lemma. Unlike traditional identification-based methods, this approach utilizes a
subspace-based representation, where historical input-state data is organized into Hankel
matrices. This structure enables the direct prediction of future system trajectories from
pre-collected data without the explicit identification of parametric state-space matrices.
Guided by this theory, an offline data-collection experiment is first conducted.
The fundamental lemma by Willems states that any trajectory generated by a linear
time-invariant (LTI) system lies in the linear span of a sufficiently rich set of previously
collected “basis trajectories” from the same system [29]. This theory enables the prediction
of the system’s future behavior based solely on historical data.
Guided by the aforementioned theory , an offline data-collection experiment is first con-
ducted in this work. Specifically , a persistently exciting input sequenceu(0), u(1), · · · , u(T − 1)
is applied to a single-agent system, and the corresponding state sequenceξ(0), ξ(1), · · · , ξ(T − 1)
is recorded simultaneously .
The collected one-dimensional time-series data is structured into two-dimensional
Hankel matrices using a sliding window technique. Since the state vector ξ(k) =h
x(k)T, v(k)T
iT
∈ R2n is 2n-dimensional and the input ui(k) ∈ R is n-dimensional, the in-
put Hankel matrix Udata ∈ RL×c and the state Hankel matrix Ξdata ∈ R2L×c are constructed
as follows:
Udata =


u(0) u(1) · · · u(T − L)
u(1) u(2) · · · u(T − L + 1)
... ... ... ...
u(L − 1) u(L) · · · u(T − 1)


(22)
Ξdata =


ξ(0) ξ(1) · · · ξ(T − L)
ξ(1) ξ(2) · · · ξ(T − L + 1)
... ... ... ...
ξ(L − 1) ξ(L) · · · ξ(T − 1)


(23)
where c = T − L + 1 is the number of columns, representing the number of valid basis
trajectories extracted from data of total length T.
A core assumption of this work is that all agents in the multi-agent network share
identical linear time-invariant (LTI) dynamics. Therefore, data collected offline from a
single agent is sufficient to describe the behavior of any agent in the network.
To construct the predictive model, we partition the Hankel matrices row-wise. Let
TP be the length of the past data window and NP be the prediction horizon, such that
L = TP + NP. It partitions Ξdata into two blocks: ΞP ∈ R2TP×c, formed by the first 2TP rows,
representing past state trajectories; and Ξ f uture ∈ R2NP×c, formed by the subsequent 2NP
rows, representing future state trajectories. Similarly, U f uture ∈ RNP×c is formed by the last
NP rows of Udata .
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 9 of 20
According to Willems’ fundamental lemma [29], for any agent i, any valid trajectory
starting from its current state ξi(k) is guaranteed to have a unique coefficient vector gi ∈ Rc
that satisfies the following relation:


ξi,init
ui, f uture
ξi, f uture

 =


ΞP
U f uture
Ξ f uture

gi (24)
where the initial state constraint is ξi,init = ξi(k), ui, f uture and ξi, f uture are the future input
and state sequences over the prediction horizon NP.
Remark 1. Theoretically, the validity of the data-driven representation relies on the Persistency of
Excitation (PE) of the offline input sequence. In our implementation, we ensure that the offline con-
trol input udata is persistently exciting of order L, guaranteeing that the Hankel matrix HL(udata )
has full row rank. Furthermore, to handle potential measurement noise and avoid numerical ill-
conditioning, Tikhonov regularization is employed in the optimization formulation. By penalizing
the norm of the coefficient vector g (i.e., adding a term λg∥g∥2 to the cost function), we relax the
rigid equality constraints. This regularization acts as a robustness margin, ensuring that the solver
finds a smooth control solution even when the data is corrupted by mild noise.
3.3. Input-Constrained Model Predictive Control Formulation
At each triggering instant k for agent i, its optimal control policy is determined by
solving a data-driven finite-horizon optimization problem, which is formulated as follows:
g∗
i (k) = arg min
gi∈Rc
Ji(gi, k)
Objective Function: Ji(gi, k):
Ji(gi, k) =
NP−1
∑
l=0

∑
j∈Ni
∥ξ pred
i,l (gi) − ˆξτ(k)
j,l (gi)∥2
Q + ∥upred
i,l (gi)∥2
R

(25)
s.t.ξi(k) = Ξi,Pgi (C1)
umin ≤ upred
i,l (gi) ≤umax , ∀l ∈ 0, · · · , NP − 1 (C2)
∑j∈Ni ∥ξ pred
i,l (gi) − ˆξτ(k)
j,l (k)∥2
Q represents the consensus cost term, which serves as the core
mechanism for driving the system toward consensus. It penalizes deviations between the
planned trajectory of agent i and the time-delayed planned trajectories of its neighbors j.
By minimizing this cost, the controller proactively computes a future path that reduces
discrepancies with neighboring agents. ∥upred
i,l (gi)∥2
R represents the control effort cost,
which quantifies the physical energy or resources required to execute the control actions.
This term ensures the uniqueness and smoothness of the solution to the optimization
problem. The weighting matrices Q ≥ 0 (positive semi-definite) and R > 0 (positive
definite) are design parameters.
At the triggering instant k, agent i computes the complete optimal future control
sequence ui(k|k) =
h
u∗
i,0, u∗
i,1, · · · , u∗
i,Np−1
iT
. However, the entire sequence is not imple-
mented; instead, the agent applies only the first control input u∗
i,0 from this sequence to
the system. Upon the arrival of the subsequent triggering instant k′, agent i first measures
its new current state ξi(k′) and then repeats the entire optimization procedure described
above to compute a new optimal control sequence based on the updated information.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 10 of 20
Remark 2. Although the presented framework focuses on homogeneous linear systems, it offers
broad extensibility. For heterogeneous agents, the consensus protocol remains valid by simply
constructing individual Hankel matrices from agent-specific datasets. For mild model mismatches
or data noise, the proposed controller exhibits inherent robustness due to the receding horizon
mechanism, which actively compensates for prediction errors via real-time state feedback updates.
Future work will further explore extensions to nonlinear dynamics, potentially by integrating
Koopman operator theory.
3.4. Implementation Procedure
To facilitate the practical application of the proposed theoretical framework, the com-
plete execution workflow of the Data-Driven Event-Triggered Predictive Control (DD-
ETPC) strategy is summarized in Table 1. This procedure delineates the offline data
processing phase and the online recursive control loop.
Table 1. Data-driven event-triggered predictive control strategy.
Require: Pre-collected dataset {udata , ξdata }; Weighting matrices Q, R; Parameters
σi, ci, ρ; Prediction horizon NP.
1. Offline Phase:
Construct Hankel matrices UP, U f uture, ΞP, Ξ f uture using (22) and (23) based on the
sliding window technique.
2. Online Phase:
For time instant k = 0, 1, 2, . . .do
For each agent i ∈ {1, . . . ,N} do
Measure current state ξi(k) and compute measurement error ei(k) via (6).
Check event-triggering condition: Is Equation (12) satisfied?
If condition is satisfied (fi(k) > 0) then
Update triggering instant ti
s ← k.
Broadcast current state ˆξi(k) to neighbors.
Solve Optimization Problem (25) to find optimal coefficient vector g∗
i .
Compute optimal control input ui(k) = u∗
i,0 from the sequence.
Apply ui(k) to the system.
Else
Maintain silence (no broadcast).
Apply control input based on the tail of the previous sequence.
End If
End For
System state evolves to k + 1.
End For
3.5. Convergence Analysis for Multi-Agent Consensus
Assumption 1. The communication graph among the agents is assumed to be strongly connected
and permanently contain a directed spanning tree.
Theorem 2. The following proof of recursive feasibility relies on the standard assumption that the in-
put constraint set is admissible for a zero control input, i.e.,umin ≤ 0 ≤ umax . Under Assumptions 1,
the closed-loop control system(1)—composed of the Objective Function(25) and the event-triggering
mechanism(12)—is asymptotically stable, and all agents achieve asymptotic consensus.
Proof of Theorem 2. This proof requires demonstrating recursive feasibility and asymp-
totic stability.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 11 of 20
First, recursive feasibility is considered. Using mathematical induction, we demon-
strate that if the optimization problem is feasible at a triggering instantk, it remains feasible
at the next triggering instant k′.
Assume that at triggering instant k, agent i successfully solves the optimization prob-
lem, obtaining the optimal solution g∗
i (k) and the corresponding optimal control sequence
u∗
i (k|k). Considering the subsequent triggering instant k′ for agent i, we construct a candi-
date control sequence ucand
i (k′|k′), which consists of the tail portion of the optimal sequence
from time k and a zero control input:
ucand
i (k′ + l|k′) =



u∗
i (k + l + 1|k), l = 0, . . . ,Np − 2
0, l = Np − 1
This candidate control sequence, driving the system starting from the actual state
ξi(k′), forms a valid system trajectory. By the existence of the data-driven representation,
there is guaranteed to exist a coefficient vectorgcand
i (k′) capable of generating this trajectory
and satisfying the initial state constraint ξi(k′) = Ξi,init gcand
i (k′).
For the first NP − 1 elements of the sequence l = (0, · · · , Np − 2), we have ucand
i (k′ +
l|k′). By the inductive hypothesis, these control inputs form part of the optimal sequence
computed at time k. Hence, they already satisfy the input constraints, i.e., umin ≤ ucand
i (k′ +
l|k′) ≤ umax
For the final element of the sequence (l = NP − 1), we have ucand
i (k′ + Np − 1|k′) = 0.
According to C2, the zero control input also satisfies the constraints, i.e., umin ≤ 0 ≤ umax
Thus, a candidate vector gcand
i (k′) has been constructed for the optimization problem at
time k′, which satisfies all constraints. Therefore, if the problem is feasible at time k, it must
also be feasible at time k′. Recursive feasibility of the optimization problem is guaranteed.
Define the Lyapunov function candidate for the multi-agent system as the summation
of the individual optimal cost functions of all agents:
V(k) =
N
∑
i=1
J∗
i (ˆki)
where J∗
i (ˆki) denotes the optimal cost value obtained by agent i by solving optimization
problem at its most recent triggering instant ˆki ≤ k. Since the stage cost is nonnegative, it
follows that V(k) ≥ 0. Consider agent i, which is triggered at time instant k′ (its previous
triggering instant being k). By the principle of optimality, have J∗
i (k′) ≤ Ji(gcand
i (k′))
The relationship between the cost of the candidate solution and the optimal cost from
the previous time step is given by:
Ji(gcand
i (k′)) = J∗
i (k) − Li(k) + Li(ξ∗
i (k + NP|k), 0,k′)
where Li(k) = ∑j∈Ni ∥ξi(k) − ˆξj(k − τ(k))∥2
Q + ∥ui(k)∥2
R denotes the actual stage cost
incurred at time k. This yields the evolution of the Lyapunov function over one trigger-
ing interval:
J∗
i (k′) − J∗
i (k) ≤ − Li(k) + Li(ξ∗
i (k + NP|k), 0,k′)
The variation of the global Lyapunov function at time instant k satisfies the follow-
ing relation:
V(k′) − V(k) ≤ − Li(k) + Li(ξ∗
i (k + NP|k), 0,k′) (26)
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 12 of 20
Summing both sides of Inequality (26) from the initial triggering instant k0 to an
arbitrary subsequent triggering instant kM, and denoting the sequence of triggered agents
during this process as i0, i1, · · · , iM−1, yields the following cumulative relation:
M−1
∑
s=0
[V(ts+1) − V(ts)] ≤ −
M−1
∑
s=0
Lis (ts) +
M−1
∑
s=0
Lis (ξ∗
is (ts + NP|ts), 0,ts+1) (27)
Rearranging the inequality yields the following:
M−1
∑
s=0
Lis (ts) ≤V(t0) − V(tM) +
M−1
∑
s=0
Lis (ξ∗
is (ts + NP|ts), 0,ks+1) (28)
where V(t0) denotes the system’s initial optimal cost, which is a finite and positive quantity.
Given that J∗
i ≥ 0 is satisfied, it concludes that −V(tM) ≤ 0.
Since the system input ui(k) is always constrained within the interval [umin, umax ],
and the system is stabilizable, it follows that the state trajectory ξi(k) is guaranteed to be
bounded provided that the initial state is bounded. Consequently, the value of the stage
cost function Li(ξ, u, k) must also lie within a finite range.
The objective of the MPC controller is to minimize the cumulative cost over the
prediction horizon of NP steps. To achieve this, the controller must drive the system state
toward regions with lower cost within the prediction horizon. If the prediction horizon
NP is sufficiently long, the terminal state of the optimal trajectory, ξ∗
is (ts + NP|ts) will
lie in close proximity to the consensus state. Consequently, the value of the cost term
Lis (ξ∗
is (ts + NP|ts), 0,ts+1) will be significantly small.
Moreover, since {Lis (ts)} constitutes a sequence of nonnegative terms whose partial
sums are bounded, it follows from the convergence criterion for nonnegative series that
∞
∑
s=0
Lis (ts) < ∞ (29)
According to the necessary condition for the convergence of a series—that its general
term must tend to zero—the following can be concluded:
lim
k→∞
Li(k) = 0, ∀i ∈ {1, · · · , N} (30)
This result is the cornerstone of the consensus proof. Based on the fact that Li(k) → 0
and that the weighting matrices Q and R are positive definite, two key preliminary results:
(1) The control inputs converge to zero: lim
k→∞
ui(k) = 0
(2) The state of agent i converges to the last broadcasted state of its neighbors:
lim
k→∞
∥ξi(k) − ˆξj(k − τ(k))∥ = 0, ∀j ∈ Ni.
First, velocity consensus is proven. From result (1), the velocity dynamics vi(k + 1) =
vi(k) + hui(k) imply that lim
k→∞
∥vi(k + 1) − vi(k)∥ = 0. This shows that for each agent,
the velocity sequence {ui(k)} is a Cauchy sequence, which guarantees its convergence to a
constant value. A critical property of a convergent sequence is that for any bounded interval,
such as the delay τ(k), the difference between terms also vanishes, i.e., lim
k→∞
∥vj(k) − vj(k −
τ(k))∥ = 0.
Furthermore, as the system stabilizes, the state-dependent part of the event-triggering
threshold, ˆζi converges to zero, and the time-dependent term ciρk also decays to zero. Since
Zeno’s behavior is excluded (Theorem 1), the inter-event times are strictly positive. This is
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 13 of 20
only possible if the measurement error that drives the trigger also converges to zero. Thus,
it holds that lim
k→∞
∥ej(k)∥ = lim
k→∞
∥ ˆξj(k) − ξj(k)∥ = 0 for all agents.
Now, consider the triangle inequality:
∥ξi(k) − ξj(k−τ(k))∥ ≤ ∥ ξi(k) − ˆξj(k − τ(k))∥
+ ∥ ˆξj(k − τ(k) − ξj(k − τ(k))∥
The first term on the right-hand side converges to zero due to result (2). The sec-
ond term is the measurement error ∥ej(k − τ(k))∥, which also converges to zero. This
definitively proves that lim
k→∞
∥ξi(k) − ξj(k − τ(k))∥ = 0.
Finally , velocity consensus is proven using another application of the triangle inequality:
∥vi(k) − vj(k)∥ ≤∥ vi(k) − vj(k − τ(k))∥ + ∥vj(k − τ(k)) − vj(k)∥
As shown above, both terms on the right-hand side converge to zero. This leads
directly to the conclusion of velocity consensus across all neighbors. By Assumption 1, this
extends to the entire network:
lim
k→∞
∥vi(k) − vj(k)∥ = 0
Since lim
k→∞
ui(k) = 0 and measurement errors vanish, it is implied that the neighbor-
hood error lim
k→∞
ζi(k) = 0. From the definition of ζi(k) in (8):
lim
k→∞ ∑
j∈Ni
aij (k)
 
α(xi(k) − xj(k)) + (vi(k) − vj(k))

= 0
Given that the velocity difference term converges to zero, the equation simplifies to
lim
k→∞ ∑
j∈Ni
aij (k)
 
α(xi(k) − xj(k))

= 0
This expression indicates that the vector of position differences lies in the null space
of the graph Laplacian. Under Assumption 1, the null space is spanned by the vectorh
1, 1, · · · , 1
iT
. This condition can only be satisfied if all position differences are zero.
Therefore, position consensus is achieved:
lim
k→∞
∥xi(k) − xj(k)∥ = 0
Thus, the asymptotic consensus of the system state is proven.
It is worth noting that data-driven approaches must contend with empirical factors
characterized by high variance, such as measurement noise or unmodeled disturbances.
The proposed framework inherently handles these fluctuations through the receding hori-
zon principle and the event-triggered mechanism. Specifically, at each triggering instant k,
the optimization problem (25) is solved based on the current actual state feedback ξi(k),
rather than relying solely on open-loop predictions. This feedback loop allows the con-
troller to compensate for accumulated deviations caused by data variance. Furthermore,
the event-triggering condition (12) acts as a dynamic supervisor: if high variance leads to a
sudden increase in the measurement error ei(k) that exceeds the threshold, the mechanism
forces an immediate update of the control input. This ensures that the system maintains
robust consensus performance even in the presence of fluctuating empirical factors.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 14 of 20
4. Numerical Examples
In this section, a set of comparative experiments is conducted to validate the effective-
ness of the proposed theory through simulations. The system model is constructed based
on Equation (1), with the time delay set to 0 < τ(k) < 3. The initial states and velocities of
the multi-agent system are configured as x1(0) = 0, x2(0) = 2, x3(0) = 5, x4(0) = −1 and
v1(0) = 5, v2(0) = 3, v3(0) = −5, v4(0) = −2, respectively. Furthermore, the communica-
tion topology is designed as follows:
A =


0 1 0 0
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1
1 0 0 0


In this example, the parameters are selected as follows: h = 0.01, α = 0.9, σi =
0.02, ci = 0.1, ρ = 0.99. Figures 1–3 present the simulation outcomes for the agent positions,
velocities, and event-triggering instants under a prediction horizon of NP = 10. Figures 4–6
show the simulation results obtained with a prediction horizon NP = 20, including the evo-
lution of multi-agent positions, velocities, and the corresponding event-triggering instants.
Figures 7–9 depict the simulation results for a prediction horizon ofNP = 30, demonstrating
the resulting multi-agent position/velocity profiles and the event-triggering behavior.
Figure 1. The positions of all agents (NP = 10).
Figure 2. Velocity trajectories of all agents with prediction horizon (NP = 10).
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 15 of 20
Figure 3. The triggering instants of all agents (NP = 10).
Figure 4. The positions of all agents (NP = 20).
Figure 5. Velocity trajectories of all agents with prediction horizon (NP = 20).
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 16 of 20
Figure 6. The triggering instants of all agents (NP = 20).
Figure 7. The positions of all agents (NP = 30).
Figure 8. Velocity trajectories of all agents (NP = 30).
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 17 of 20
Figure 9. The triggering instants of all agents (NP = 30).
The results confirm that the proposed control protocol successfully drives all agents to
achieve consensus in both position and velocity for all tested prediction horizons. A longer
prediction horizon yields superior control performance. As NP increases from 10 to 30,
the system exhibits a faster convergence speed and smaller overshoots, as visually demon-
strated in the position and velocity trajectory plots. A critical finding is the inverse relation-
ship between the prediction horizon length and the communication frequency. As shown
in the comparative bar chart Figure 10, increasing NP significantly reduces the total number
of event triggers for every agent.
Figure 10. Comparison of the event-triggering frequency of the multi-agent system under different
prediction horizons NP.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 18 of 20
5. Conclusions
To further evaluate the proposed framework, it is essential to discuss the results in
relation to existing methodologies reported in the literature [7,30].
Comparison with Model-Based Strategies: Traditional event-triggered consensus
protocols, such as those reviewed in [30], typically rely on accurate system matrices (A, B) to
compute control laws. While effective under ideal conditions, their performance degrades
significantly when parametric uncertainties or modeling errors exist. In contrast, our
DD-ETPC framework leverages Willems’ fundamental lemma to generate control actions
directly from data, effectively eliminating the sensitivity to modeling mismatches.
Comparison with Standard Data-Driven Methods: Although other data-driven ap-
proaches (e.g., [7]) avoid model reliance, they often lack an explicit mechanism to compen-
sate for time-varying communication delays. Our method distinguishes itself by integrating
Predictive Control. The receding horizon mechanism allows agents to predict future states
and actively compensate for delays during transmission gaps, ensuring smoother conver-
gence and higher stability margins compared to non-predictive schemes.
Furthermore, the inherent robustness of the proposed predictive framework against
time-varying delays suggests its potential applicability in enhancing the security of multi-
agent systems against availability attacks, such as DoS jamming. This paper has presented
a systematic investigation into the consensus control of discrete-time multi-agent systems
subject to time-varying delays. Addressing the specific research objectives outlined in the
Introduction, the primary contributions and findings are summarized as follows:
(1) First, we have established a robust data-driven event-triggered predictive control
framework. By seamlessly integrating predictive control with an event-triggered
mechanism, this architecture effectively mitigates the adverse effects of unknown
system dynamics and time-varying communication delays, ensuring reliable consensus
under resource-constrained conditions.
(2) Second, distinct from traditional model-based paradigms, our approach utilizes
Willems’ fundamental lemma to construct predictive models directly from histori-
cal input-state trajectories. This methodology circumvents the need for explicit system
identification, thereby enhancing the system’s adaptability to complex or hard-to-
model environments.
(3) Third, rigorous theoretical analysis has substantiated the recursive feasibility of the
proposed optimization algorithm and the asymptotic stability of the closed-loop sys-
tem. Crucially, we have mathematically derived a positive lower bound for inter-event
times, guaranteeing the exclusion of Zeno behavior and ensuring the physical imple-
mentability of the controller.
(4) Finally, extensive numerical simulations have validated the efficacy of the proposed
strategy. The results explicitly elucidate the dual impact of the prediction horizon (NP):
a larger horizon not only accelerates consensus convergence but also significantly
suppresses the frequency of event triggers, revealing a quantifiable trade-off between
computational foresight and communication overhead.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: C.-J.L.; Methodology: C.-J.L. and W.X.; Software: C.-J.L.
and W.X.; Validation: L.Q., Z.D., and J.L.; Investigation: L.Q., Z.D., and J.L.; Resources: C.-J.L.;
Writing—original draft preparation: C.-J.L. and W.X.; Writing—review and editing: C.-J.L., W.X., and
L.Q.; Visualization: W.X.; Project administration: C.-J.L. and S.Y.; Funding acquisition: C.-J.L. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation of China under grant
No. 62441308.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 19 of 20
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Nomenclature
Symbol Description
N Number of agents in the system
G, L, A Communication graph, Laplacian matrix, and adjacency matrix
xi(k), vi(k) Position and velocity of agent i at time step k
ui(k) Control input of agent i
τ(k) Time-varying communication delay
ei(k) Measurement error at time k
tis The s-th triggering instant for agent i
NP Prediction horizon length
Q, R Positive definite weighting matrices for state and input
Ji(gi, k) Cost function for the predictive optimization problem
References
1. Olfati-Saber, R.; Murray, R.M. Consensus problems in networks of agents with switching topology and time-delays.IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 2004, 49, 1520–1533.
2. Li, X.; Liu, J.C.; Li, X.G. Consensus of first-order discrete-time multi-agent systems with time delays. J. Frankl. Inst. 2019, 356,
5315–5331.
3. Ma, D.; Boussaada, I.; Chen, J.; Bonnet, C.; Niculescu, S.I.; Chen, J. PID control design for first-order delay systems via MID pole
placement: Performance vs. robustness. Automatica 2022, 137, 110102.
4. Wang, J.; Luo, X.; Yan, J.; Guan, X. Event-triggered consensus control for second-order multi-agent system subject to saturation
and time delay. J. Frankl. Inst. 2021, 358, 4895–4916.
5. Ma, Q.; Xu, S. Consensus switching of second-order multiagent systems with time delay. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2022, 52, 3349–3353.
6. Yang, S.; Liu, Q.; Wang, J. Distributed optimization based on a multiagent system in the presence of communication delays. IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 2016, 47, 717–728.
7. Bu, X.; Hou, Z.; Zhang, H. Data-Driven Multiagent Systems Consensus Tracking Using Model Free Adaptive Control. IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2018, 29, 1514–1524.
8. Zhou, Y.; Li, D.; Gao, F. Data-Driven Optimal Synchronization Control for Leader-Follower Multiagent Systems.IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. Syst. 2023, 53, 495–503.
9. Zhang, H.; Yue, D.; Dou, C.; Zhao, W.; Xie, X. Data-Driven Distributed Optimal Consensus Control for Unknown Multiagent
Systems With Input-Delay. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2019, 49, 2095–2105.
10. Li, H.; Wei, Q. Data-Driven Optimal Output Cluster Synchronization Control of Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Systems. IEEE Trans.
Autom. Sci. Eng. 2024, 21, 3910–3920.
11. Huang, Y.; Liu, G.P .; Yu, Y.; Hu, W. Data-driven distributed predictive tracking control for heterogeneous nonlinear multiagent
systems with communication delays. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 2024, 69, 4786–4792.
12. Dou, Y.; Xing, G.; Ma, A.; Zhao, G. A review of event-triggered consensus control in multi-agent systems. J. Control Decis. 2025,
12, 1–23.
13. Yang, Y.; Li, Y.; Yue, D. Event-trigger-based consensus secure control of linear multi-agent systems under DoS attacks over
multiple transmission channels. Sci. China Inf. Sci. 2020, 63, 150208.
14. Liu, K.; Ji, Z. Dynamic Event-Triggered Consensus of General Linear Multi-Agent Systems With Adaptive Strategy.IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. II Express Briefs 2022, 69, 3440–3444.
15. Dong, T.; Zhu, H.; Hu, W. Event-trigger optimal consensus for multi-agent system subject to differential privacy.Int. J. Control
Autom. Syst. 2021, 19, 2940–2949.
16. Zhang, X.Z.; Lan, J.; Liu, Y.J.; Liu, L. Adaptive event-triggered control of multi-agent systems with state constraints and unknown
disturbances. IET Control Theory Appl. 2021, 17, 2171–2182.
17. Zhang, W.; Chen, J.; Wen, S.; Huang, T. Event-Triggered Random Delayed Impulsive Consensus of Multi-Agent Systems With
Time-Varying Delay.IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell. 2025, 9, 2059–2064.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723

Appl. Sci. 2026, 16, 1723 20 of 20
18. Abbasi, M.; Marquez, H.J. Observer-based event-triggered consensus control of multi-agent systems with time-varying communi-
cation delays. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 2023, 21, 6336–6346.
19. Cheng, Z.; Zhang, H.T.; Fan, M.C.; Chen, G. Distributed Consensus of Multi-Agent Systems With Input Constraints: A Model
Predictive Control Approach. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Regul. Pap. 2015, 62, 825–834.
20. Pang, Y.; Zhao, X. Bayesian spatio-temporal graph transformer network (b-star) for multi-aircraft trajectory prediction. Knowl.-
Based Syst. 2022, 249, 108998.
21. Köhler, M.; Müller, M.A.; Allgöwer, F. Distributed Model Predictive Control for Dynamic Cooperation of Multi-Agent Systems.
arXiv 2025, arXiv:2504.00225.
22. Liu, G.P . Coordination of Networked Nonlinear Multi-Agents Using a High-Order Fully Actuated Predictive Control Strategy.
IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin. 2022, 9, 615–623.
23. Su, Y.; Shi, Y.; Sun, C. Distributed model predictive control for tracking consensus of linear multiagent systems with additive
disturbances and time-varying communication delays. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2019, 51, 3813–3823.
24. Yang, Q.; Sun, J.; Chen, J. Output Consensus for Heterogeneous Linear Multiagent Systems With a Predictive Event-Triggered
Mechanism. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2021, 51, 1993–2005.
25. Liu, X.; Xuan, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Diao, Z.; Mu, Z.; Li, Z. Event-triggered consensus for discrete-time multi-agent systems with
parameter uncertainties based on a predictive control scheme. J. Syst. Sci. Complex. 2020, 33, 706–624.
26. Yin, X.; Yue, D.; Hu, S.; Zhang, H. Distributed adaptive model-based event-triggered predictive control for consensus of
multiagent systems. Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control 2018, 28, 6180–6201.
27. Qin D; Jin Z; Zhang, Z.; Asynchronous event-triggered distributed predictive control for multiagent systems with parameterized
synchronization constraints IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control. 2023, 69, 403–409.
28. Tang, X.; Li, M.; Wei, S.; Ding, B. Event-triggered synchronous distributed model predictive control for multi-agent systems.Int. J.
Control Autom. Syst. 2021, 19, 1273–1282.
29. Van Waarde, H.J.; De Persis, C.; Camlibel, M.K.; Tesi, P . Willems’ Fundamental Lemma for State-Space Systems and Its Extension
to Multiple Datasets. IEEE Control Syst. Lett. 2020, 4, 602–607.
30. Li, Y.; Wang, X.; Sun, J.; Wang, G.; Chen, J. Data-driven consensus control of fully distributed event-triggered multi-agent systems.
Sci. China Inf. Sci. 2023, 66, 152202.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app16041723