1
Deep Bilinear Koopman Model for Real-Time
Vehicle Control in Frenet Frame
Mohammad Abtahi, Member, IEEE,, Farhang Motallebi Araghi, Navid Mojahed, Shima Nazari, Member, IEEE,
Abstract—Accurate modeling and control of autonomous ve-
hicles remain a fundamental challenge due to the nonlinear and
coupled nature of vehicle dynamics. While Koopman operator
theory offers a framework for deploying powerful linear control
techniques, learning a finite-dimensional invariant subspace for
high-fidelity modeling continues to be an open problem. This
paper presents a deep Koopman approach for modeling and
control of vehicle dynamics within the curvilinear Frenet frame.
The proposed framework uses a deep neural network archi-
tecture to simultaneously learn the Koopman operator and its
associated invariant subspace from the data. Input–state bilinear
interactions are captured by the algorithm while preserving
convexity, which makes it suitable for real-time model predictive
control (MPC) application. A multi-step prediction loss is utilized
during training to ensure long-horizon prediction capability. To
further enhance real-time trajectory tracking performance, the
model is integrated with a cumulative error regulator (CER)
module, which compensates for model mismatch by mitigat-
ing accumulated prediction errors. Closed-loop performance
is evaluated through hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) experiments
using a CarSim RT model as the target plant, with real-time
validation conducted on a dSPACE SCALEXIO system. The
proposed controller achieved significant reductions in tracking
error relative to baseline controllers, confirming its suitability
for real-time implementation in embedded autonomous vehicle
systems.
Index Terms—Autonomous Vehicles, Vehicle Dynamics, Frenet
Frame, Deep Learning, Koopman Operator, Data-Driven Mod-
eling, Model Predictive Control.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A
UTONOMOUS vehicles have the potential to revolu-
tionize transportation, but ensuring safety remains a
critical challenge. Achieving safe and reliable operation under
diverse and potentially hazardous conditions requires accurate
modeling and robust control strategies [1]. However, real-time
control development is hindered by the nonlinear nature of
vehicle dynamics and the inherent uncertainties in real-world
driving environments.
Optimization-based control strategies such as Model Predic-
tive Control (MPC) [2]–[4] and Linear-Quadratic Regulators
(LQR) [5] stand out for enhancing the safety and maneu-
vering capabilities of autonomous vehicles [6]. In particular,
nonlinear MPC offers high-fidelity control performance by
directly accounting for vehicle and tire nonlinearities, but
it typically results in a non-convex optimization problem.
This substantially increases computational demands and may
lead to suboptimal outcomes, limiting the applicability of
The authors are with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engi-
neering, University of California Davis, USA (e-mail: sabtahi@ucdavis.edu;
fmotallebi@ucdavis.edu; nmojahed@ucdavis.edu; snazari@ucdavis.edu)
Fig. 1. Illustration of Koopman operator lifting.
nonlinear MPC in real-time scenarios [7]. On the other hand,
linear control approaches, such as LQR and Linear MPC,
offer computational efficiency and theoretical guarantees of
optimality by leveraging simplified models of vehicle dynam-
ics [8]. These models are typically obtained through Jacobian
linearization around equilibrium points or along trajectory
operating points, resulting in linear time-invariant (LTI) or
linear time-varying (LTV) representations [9]. While effective
for local approximations, such linearized models often fail
to capture the full nonlinear behavior of vehicle dynamics,
specifically during aggressive steering maneuvers, emergency
braking, or operation at stability limits [10]. These limitations
motivate the exploration of alternative modeling techniques
that balance accuracy and computational efficiency.
Recent advances in data collection and large-scale datasets
have made data-driven modeling effective for learning system
behaviors [11]. These methods rely directly on observed
data rather than first-principles modeling [12]. In particular,
end-to-end learning approaches, where raw sensor data are
directly mapped to control actions or vehicle states using deep
neural networks, have been widely explored in the context
of autonomous driving and vehicle dynamics modeling [13].
While such models often achieve high predictive performance,
they tend to lack interpretability and structure, making them
difficult to analyze or incorporate into safety-critical control
systems. Among interpretable alternatives, the Koopman op-
erator theory has gained significant attention for its ability
to transform nonlinear dynamics into an infinite-dimensional
linear representation in the space of observable functions [14].
arXiv:2507.12578v1  [eess.SY]  16 Jul 2025

2
These scalar-valued functions lift the original state space into a
higher-dimensional space, allowing nonlinear system behavior
to be described using linear structures, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Such a linear representation allows the direct application
of linear control strategies to inherently nonlinear systems,
making Koopman operator methods particularly promising for
A V modeling and control [15]. Since numerical computation
with an infinite-dimensional Koopman operator is impractical,
researchers have developed several techniques to approximate
a finite-dimensional representation for Koopman dynamics.
Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD) [16], [17], Extended
Dynamic Mode Decomposition (EDMD) [18], and the eigen-
function approach [19] have been widely used to approximate
Koopman representations of systems with no control inputs.
In addition, variants of DMD and EDMD, called DMDc [20]
and EDMDc [15], have been extensively applied to systems
with control inputs.
Despite recent advancements, most Koopman-based control
methods assume linear dependence on control inputs, which
limits their ability to capture nonlinear control-state coupling
and reduces predictive accuracy in general nonlinear systems.
This limitation becomes particularly problematic in vehicle
dynamics, where, for instance, the steering angle interacts
nonlinearly with vehicle speed to generate lateral forces. On
the other hand, embedding nonlinear control inputs within
the lifting functions has been shown to introduce causality
issues [21], which remains an open challenge in the field. As
an alternative, bilinear models provide a favorable trade-off
between capturing nonlinear system dynamics and maintaining
computational tractability [22]. However, employing a bilinear
predictive model can lead to non-convexities in the resulting
optimal control problem. Prior works have addressed this
challenge by fixing the coupling terms over the prediction
horizon to preserve linearity [23].
Several studies have explored Koopman-based methods for
vehicle dynamics modeling and control. Cibulka et al. [24]
identified velocity dynamics using EDMD with manually se-
lected basis functions. The authors later extended this approach
to a predictive controller [25]. Svec et al. [26] proposed
an MPC scheme using a predictor identified via EDMD
and fourth-order polynomial basis functions, demonstrating
improved predictive performance over an MPC controller with
a linearized model. Kim et al. [27] applied EDMD to obtain a
Koopman model of vehicle dynamics for an LQR lane-keeping
controller, achieving improved accuracy over traditional linear
models. More recently, Yu et al. [23] proposed a Koopman
MPC framework for motion planning and control using poly-
nomial observables.
Despite these advancements, a significant limitation of these
approaches is the manual selection of observables, which often
relies on trial-and-error procedures to identify lifting functions
that adequately span the Koopman-invariant subspace. With
the emergence of large-scale AI applications and the high
representational capacity of neural networks, recent studies
have investigated deep learning approaches to address this is-
sue. These approaches automate the identification of Koopman
observables through autoencoder structures [28]. Xiao et al.
[29], [30] proposed a neural network model to learn Koop-
Fig. 2. Vehicle states in the curvilinear Frenet frame: longitudinal velocity
vx, lateral velocity vy, yaw rate ˙ψ, progress gain ∆s, lateral deviation ey,
heading error eψ. Road curvature is denoted by κ.
man representations for vehicle dynamics. While effective for
tracking velocity profiles, the method lacked a global posi-
tioning framework, which is essential for achieving high-level
navigation and control objectives. To address this limitation,
the approach proposed in our previous work [31] introduced
a deep Koopman framework that models vehicle dynamics
within the curvilinear Frenet frame illustrated in Fig. 2. Build-
ing on that foundation, the present work extends the model to
a bilinear structure. This novel scheme enables the encoding
of bilinear interactions between inputs and state-dependent
observables while preserving compatibility with predictive
control strategies. To further increase control precision, the
identified dynamics are augmented with a Cumulative Error
Regulator (CER), which compensates for model mismatch
during optimization by explicitly propagating and penalizing
accumulated prediction errors over the horizon. The prediction
capability of the proposed approach is then compared against
an LTI model, an EDMD Koopman model, and the previously
developed Multi-Step Deep Koopman Network (MDK-Net)
structure [31]. Unlike prior approaches, our method directly
incorporates driver inputs, steering wheel angle, throttle, and
brake pedal commands as system inputs. This design choice
enables capturing the nonlinearities within the steering actu-
ation, powertrain dynamics, driveline, and braking behavior.
Finally, hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) simulations are conducted
using a dSPACE SCALEXIO platform to ensure the real-
time applicability of the proposed controller. The controller’s
real-time performance is then benchmarked against baseline
controllers using a high-fidelity CarSim model.
The key contributions of this work are outlined below:
• A Multi-Step Deep Bilinear Koopman Network (MDBK-
Net) is developed, which jointly learns the Koopman-
invariant subspace via an encoder network and the bi-
linear Koopman operator matrices.
• To enhance model fidelity in capturing the nonlinear
dynamics of the steering, powertrain, driveline, and brak-
ing subsystems, the driver commands of steering wheel
angle, throttle, and brake pedal are directly incorporated
as system inputs. Additionally, Frenet frame modeling is
achieved by integrating road curvature as an exogenous
input, which facilitates the coupled vehicle lateral and
longitudinal control.
• The identified lifted dynamics are augmented with the
CER module within the MPC formulation. This module

3
is designed to mitigate cumulative tracking errors arising
from the Koopman approximation, thereby further en-
hancing the controller’s tracking performance and safety.
• The real-time performance of the proposed controller
is validated through HIL testing using a dSPACE
SCALEXIO system and a high-fidelity CarSim Real-
Time (RT) vehicle model, demonstrating the controller’s
computational efficiency for real-time implementation.
This work highlights a strong use case for leveraging AI,
particularly deep learning, in addressing longstanding chal-
lenges in model identification and real-time control of complex
nonlinear systems. The remainder of the paper is organized
as follows. Section II presents the necessary preliminaries
to Koopman operator theory. The structure of the proposed
MDBK-Net, its augmentation with CER, and the developed
MPC framework are all discussed in Section III. Section IV
describes the experimental setup and presents the evaluation
results, and conclusions are drawn in Section V
II. P RELIMINARIES
This section introduces the Koopman operator theory and
its application to nonlinear system modeling, forming the
theoretical foundation for the proposed deep bilinear Koopman
control framework. The Koopman operator, originally intro-
duced for dynamical systems analysis [14], [32], provides a
globally linear representation of nonlinear dynamical systems
by lifting the states of a system to a higher-dimensional
space of observables. Such a linear representation enables
the application of well-established linear control techniques
to inherently nonlinear systems.
A. Koopman Operator
Consider a discrete-time nonlinear autonomous system as
xk+1 = fa(xk), (1)
where xk ∈ Rn is the state vector of the system at time step
k, and fa : Rn → Rn is the nonlinear smooth mapping
of the dynamics. Then the infinite dimensional Koopman
operator Ka : Ha → H a provides a linear representation
of the nonlinear dynamics in (1) by acting on scalar-valued
observable functions ψa(·) : Rn → R as
ψa(xk+1) = ψa(fa(xk)) = Kaψa(xk), (2)
where each observable function ψa(·) ∈ H a is an element of
infinite dimensional Hilbert space Ha, which is invariant under
the Koopman operator [15]. Although the Koopman operator
was originally formulated for autonomous systems [14], works
by Korda et al. [15] and Proctor et al. [33] have shown that
it can also be extended to input driven systems. Consider a
general discrete-time nonlinear system with control input as
xk+1 = f(xk, uk), (3)
where uk ∈ Rm is the control input vector at time k.
The space of admissible control sequences is defined as
L(U) = {(uk)∞
k=0|uk ∈ U } which was introduced in [15].
The extended state-space can then be defined in the space of
Rn × L(U), and it is given by
χk =
xk
νk

, (4)
where νk = [ uk, uk+1, ...u∞] ⊂ L (U) is an infinite di-
mensional sequence of input vector. Under this formulation,
the system dynamics (3) can be described as an autonomous
system such that
χk+1 = F (χk) :=
f(xk, νk(0))
Sνk

, (5)
where S is the left shift operator, i.e.Sνk = νk+1, and νk(0) =
uk is the first element of the control sequence of ν at time
step k. Then the infinite dimensional Koopman operator K :
H → H associated with (5) can be defined as
ψ(χk+1) = ψ(F (χk)) = Kψ(χk), (6)
where ψ(·) ∈ H : Rn × L(U) → R is a real-valued observable
function that belongs to the extended function space of H
invariant under Koopman operator K. Equation (6) implies
that the Koopman operator is linear in the function space H,
even when the dynamic system f(., .) is nonlinear [34].
B. Linear Koopman Modeling
Direct computation with the infinite-dimensional Koopman
operator K is generally intractable. However, when a fi-
nite set of q observable functions is specified, the infinite-
dimensional Koopman can be approximated by a finite-
dimensional linear operator K acting within the subspace
spanned by the observable set. The original state-input pair
(x, u) is thus lifted into a higher-dimensional embedding
space through a vector-valued observable Ψ(xk, uk) =
[ψ1(xk, uk), ψ2(xk, uk), . . . , ψq(xk, uk)]⊤ with ψi : Rn ×
Rm → R, which satisfies
Ψ(xk+1, uk+1) = KΨ(xk, uk). (7)
To facilitate the control design, the vector-valued observable
function Ψ(xk, uk) can be further divided into two compo-
nents
Ψ(xk, uk) =
 Ψx(xk)
Ψu(xk, uk)

, (8)
where
Ψx(xk) = [ψ1(xk), . . . , ψp(xk)]⊤ ∈ Rp, (9)
Ψu(xk, uk) = [ψp+1(xk, uk), . . . , ψq(xk, uk)]⊤ ∈ Rd,
(10)
with d = q − p, where p denotes the number of state-
dependent observables. For a causal linear Koopman real-
ization, it is assumed Ψu(xk, uk) = uk, i.e., the state-
input dependent observable component is dependent only on
inputs [35]. Then the system dynamics under the approximated
Koopman matrix K can be described as
Ψx(xk+1)
uk+1

=
Axx Bxu
Aux Buu
 Ψx(xk)
uk

. (11)

4
Since the focus is solely on the evolution of observables
associated with the system states, and the control inputs are
treated as externally specified by the controller rather than
dynamically modeled, the representation reduces to a form
governed solely by the state-dependent observable dynamics,
as
Ψx(xk+1) = AxxΨx(xk) + Bxuuk, (12)
where Axx ∈ Rp×p and Bxu ∈ Rp×m are the finite-
dimensional Koopman approximation.
C. Bilinear Koopman Modeling
In linear Koopman modeling, control-related observables
are typically chosen directly as the control inputs. However,
a more general form can be expressed as Ψu(xk, uk) =
[u⊤
k , h(xk, uk)⊤]⊤, where h(·, ·) denotes a vector of nonlin-
ear functions of states and inputs. While this generalization
may improve model fidelity, it introduces nonlinearities with
respect to control inputs and may result in non-causal system
dynamics if the values of these observables cannot be directly
measured [21]. Such nonlinear dependencies compromise one
of the main advantages of Koopman-based approaches, which
is preserving linearity to facilitate efficient and computation-
ally tractable control design. To strike a balance between
model accuracy and optimization tractability, recent studies
have proposed bilinear Koopman realizations [22], [36], [37].
Bilinear terms maintain compatibility with Koopman frame-
works while offering enhanced expressiveness compared to
purely linear models. The bilinear interaction term h(xk, uk)
can be specified as a Kronecker product of the control input
vector and state-dependent observable vector such that
h(xk, uk) = uk ⊗ Ψx(xk) =


u1
k · Ψx(xk)
...
um
k · Ψx(xk)

 , (13)
where ui
k denotes the i-th component of the control input
vector uk, for i = 1 , . . . , m. This structure can then be
utilized to augment the vector-valued observable defined in
(8), yielding an extended observable vector given by
Ψ(xk, uk) =


Ψx(xk)
uk
u1
k · Ψx(xk)
...
um
k · Ψx(xk)


. (14)
Finally, the bilinear Koopman representation can be ex-
pressed as
Ψ(xk+1, uk+1) =
"Axx Bxu H1 · · · Hm
... ... ... ... ...
#
Ψ(xk, uk),
(15)
where the evolution of state-dependent observables is explic-
itly described by
Ψx(xk+1) = AxxΨx(xk) + Bxuuk +
mX
i=1
Hi

ui
k · Ψx(xk)

.
(16)
Here, the matrices Axx and Bxu represent the linear dynamics
in the lifted space, and remain constant over time, while
the time invariant bilinear matrices Hi ∈ Rp×p encode the
multiplicative interactions between each control input chan-
nel ui
k and the state dependent observable features Ψx(xk).
Such a bilinear formulation preserves linearity with respect
to decision variables within an MPC framework, as will be
discussed in Section III-H, while enabling a more accurate
modeling of control-dependent dynamics. Notably, when all
Hi, i = 1, . . . , m, are zero, the model reduces to the standard
linear Koopman realization.
To improve clarity, a slight abuse of notation was adopted
by denoting A := Axx and B := Bxu throughout the
remainder of the paper. The matrices A, B, and Hi’s must
be identified from data, alongside the state-dependent lifting
functions. These lifting functions can either be selected from
a predefined library of observables or learned directly using
deep neural network (DNN) architectures. The lifted states are
denoted by Zk = Ψx(xk), where Ψx(·) represents the vector
of state-dependent observable functions that map the original
state space to the lifted subspace. Building on this theoretical
foundation, the following section presents a comprehensive
methodology for data-driven identification of these lifting
functions and Koopman matrices, which ultimately leads to
their integration within a predictive control framework.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, the nonlinear vehicle dynamics that need
to be identified using the bilinear Koopman framework are
first presented. For identification and performance evaluation,
a structured three-stage pipeline was adopted. In the first
stage, a rich and diverse dataset is generated using the Car-
Sim simulation platform under varying initial conditions and
driving scenarios to accurately capture a broad range of the
vehicle’s dynamic behavior. In the second stage, the MDBK-
Net architecture was introduced, which jointly learns the lifting
functions and the Koopman matrices. To mitigate long-horizon
prediction drift caused by model approximation errors, the
learned Koopman model is augmented with the CER block. In
the final stage, the model’s performance is evaluated through
open-loop simulations, while real-time closed-loop perfor-
mance is assessed under an MPC scheme using hardware-in-
the-loop (HIL) testing. An overview of the complete modeling
and control pipeline, which includes data acquisition, encoder
and Koopman matrix identification, integration with the CER
module, and MPC deployment, is illustrated in Fig. 3.
A. Vehicle Dynamics
To establish a foundation for subsequent discussions and to
gain insight into the key nonlinearities present in the vehicle
dynamics illustrated in Fig. 2, a simplified nonlinear bicycle
model is introduced, formulated in the Frenet frame as
˙vx = 1
m
 
F f
x cos(δf) − F f
y sin(δf) + F r
x

+ ˙ψvy (17a)
˙vy = 1
m
 
F f
x sin(δf) + F f
y cos(δf) + F r
y

− ˙ψvx (17b)
¨ψ = 1
Iz
 
lf F f
x sin(δf) + lf F f
y cos(δf) − lrF r
y

(17c)

5
Fig. 3. Architecture of the proposed MDBK-Net framework. The system consists of three main components: (i) a data acquisition block for preparing training
and test datasets, (ii) a multistep Deep Bilinear Koopman Network block that defines the neural architecture used for learning the Koopman model, and (iii) a
control block that employs the identified observables and Koopman dynamics as the predictive model within an optimal control framework. The control block
is further enhanced with the CER to improve tracking performance. In this figure, Norm stands for data normalization, and De-norm stands for de-normalizing
the data to its original values.
˙s = vx cos(eψ) − vy sin(eψ)
1 − κey
(17d)
˙ey = vx sin(eψ) + vy cos(eψ) (17e)
˙eψ = ˙ψ − vx cos(eψ) − vy sin(eψ)
1 − κey
κ (17f)
Here, vx, vy, ˙ψ, s, ey, and eψ denote the vehicle states
as longitudinal velocity, lateral velocity, yaw rate, progress
along the path, lateral deviation from the reference path, and
heading error, respectively. The parameters m and Iz represent
the vehicle’s mass and yaw moment of inertia. The terms
F f
x , F f
y , F r
x , F r
y correspond to the longitudinal and lateral tire
forces at the front and rear wheels, δf denotes the front wheel
steering angle, while the variable κ represents the curvature of
the reference path. Note that although the above equations of
motion capture key nonlinearities, the actual vehicle dynamics
are significantly more complex. The high-fidelity CarSim
model used here includes steering system dynamics, power-
train and braking systems, load transfer effects, and nonlinear
tire behaviors. Accurate modeling of such a system within a
control-oriented and optimization-friendly framework is often
impractical in many real-world scenarios. This motivates the
use of data-driven modeling techniques to identify precise
representations of vehicle dynamics from observed behavior.
Accordingly, a general discrete-time nonlinear mapping of
vehicle dynamics is considered as
xk+1 = fv(xk, uk, wk), (18)
where k is the discrete time index and xk ∈ Rn, uk ∈ Rm,
and wk ∈ Rl represent vehicle states, driver input commands,
and road exogenous inputs, respectively. The function fv :
Rn+m+l → Rn denotes the nonlinear state transition mapping
of the vehicle dynamics. Similar to Eq. (17), the state vector
can be explicitly denoted by
x = [vx, vy, ˙ψ, ∆s, ey, eψ]⊤, (19)
with a slight modification, the term ∆s represents the progress
gain at each time step along the reference path. This modifi-
cation is introduced to improve the consistency and numerical
stability of the training process in the deep learning framework
presented later.
Note that the representation in (17) accepts the front-wheel
steering angle and tire forces as system inputs; however, in the
dynamical model (18), the control input vector corresponds to
driver commands given by
u = [δw, uζ]⊤, (20)
where δw denotes the hand wheel steering angle, and uζ ∈
[−1, 1] represents the longitudinal drive command, with pos-
itive values corresponding to throttle and negative values

6
to braking. Additionally, the exogenous input vector, which
captures the effect of road curvature on the vehicle’s pose, is
defined as
w = [κ]⊤. (21)
To accurately identify and model the nonlinear dynamics
described above within the Koopman operator framework, it
is crucial to generate a comprehensive dataset that reflects
the full range of vehicle behavior under realistic driving
conditions. A high-fidelity dataset was generated using the
CarSim simulation platform. The data collection process is
described in the following section.
B. Data Acquisition and Preparation
The training dataset was generated using CarSim, a high-
fidelity simulation platform for modeling real-world vehicle
behavior. A C-Class hatchback vehicle configuration equipped
with a 150 kW engine and an all-wheel-drive system was
used. A total of 7,000 simulated episodes are generated across
various driving scenarios, each lasting 10 seconds with a
sampling interval of ts = 25 ms , yielding 400 discrete time
steps per episode. To further diversify the data, introduce
varied initial conditions, and maintain consistency with the
prediction horizon used in MPC, each episode is divided into
five non-overlapping 2-second segments, resulting in 35,000
distinct trajectories.
Each simulated driving scenario captures the evolution of
vehicle states governed by the applied control inputs. Rather
than using arbitrary inputs, a structured input generation
procedure is employed to ensure realistic driving behavior.
Exogenous road curvature values κ are sampled uniformly
from the range [−4 × 10−3, 4 × 10−3] m−1, corresponding to
turning radius as small as 250 meters in either direction.
At each time step k = 1 , . . . ,400, the driver command
uk is constructed such that the steering wheel input δw ∈
[−40◦, 40◦] is generated by fitting a polynomial curve to
uniformly distributed key points across the episode horizon,
producing a smooth steering profile. The longitudinal actua-
tion input uζ ∈ [−1, 1] is simulated, where positive values
denote throttle and negative values represent braking effort,
scaled proportionally to reflect pedal force. This normaliza-
tion enforces mutual exclusivity between throttle and brake
commands, ensuring that the brake input is zero whenever the
throttle is active, and vice versa. Longitudinal drive command
rates are constrained to reflect realistic driver behavior, guided
by human reaction time estimates from [38]. This is achieved
by segmenting each episode into one-second intervals, which
promotes consistent pedal usage within each segment.
The synthesized input sequence is applied to the CarSim
vehicle model, and the resulting state trajectories are recorded.
All inputs and states are subsequently normalized using the
mean and standard deviation computed across the entire
dataset, denoted by Norm blocks as shown in Fig. 3. Finally,
the resulting dataset serves as the basis for training the MDBK
Network.
C. MDBK Network Architecture
The MDBK-Net introduced in this work explicitly modeled
both linear and bilinear interactions between lifted states and
control inputs. In the following subsections, each component
of the MDBK-Net architecture is detailed.
1) Encoder Network Structure: Unlike traditional ap-
proaches where the lifting functions are selected from pre-
defined libraries of nonlinear basis functions, such as poly-
nomials, or radial basis functions, a data-driven strategy is
employed using neural networks to learn the lifting functions
directly from data.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, an encoder network Φθ, param-
eterized by weights θ, maps the original state xk ∈ Rn
to a subspace Φθ(xk) ∈ Rp−n. The lifted components are
given by Φθ(xk) = [ ϕ1(xk), . . . , ϕp−n(xk)]⊤, where each
ϕi : Rn → R denotes a nonlinear function learned by the
neural network. The encoder network is implemented as a
fully connected feedforward multi-layer perceptron (MLP) uti-
lizing ReLU activation functions, with specific configurations
detailed in Table I. The dimension p of the lifted subspace
is treated as a design parameter; increasing p generally en-
hances model fidelity but also increases computational cost
and the risk of overfitting. Evaluation of different network
architectures indicated that using 60 nodes in the encoder’s
output layer offers the best trade-off between accuracy and
model complexity. To facilitate interpretability and accurate
reconstruction of the original states, the lifted space Zk is
constructed by concatenating the original state xk with the
encoder output layer. Accordingly, the full lifted state space
is given by
Zk =
 xk
Φθ(xk)

∈ Rp. (22)
This structure guarantees that the predicted original states can
be later recovered using a simple linear projection matrix.
Given the discrete-time vehicle dynamics in (18), The
combined input vector is defined, which applies to the vehicle
dynamics as
Uk =
uk
wk

∈ Rm+l, (23)
where Uk is the concatenation of the driver control inputs uk
and road exogenous inputs wk. Note that road specifications
such as curvature κ are independent of the vehicle state and
are typically available through onboard sensors or perception
systems. For further details on incorporating such exogenous
inputs, the reader is referred to [39] [40]. The lifted states Zk,
the bilinear interaction term (Uk ⊗Zk)⊤, and the control input
Uk are then passed to the final Koopman layer of the network.
2) Koopman Layer Structure: The Koopman layer is im-
plemented as the last neural network layer without any bias
or activation functions, where the Koopman operator is ap-
proximated using learnable matrices. The matrices A, B, and
the set of bilinear matrices {Hi}m+l
i=1 will be constructed
and trained simultaneously with encoder parameters. Then

7
the corresponding single-step bilinear Koopman propagation
based on (16) can be expressed as
ˆZk+1 = AZk + BUk +
m+lX
i=1
Hi

U i
k · Zk

, (24)
where Zk denotes the lifted state vector constructed according
to (22) and ˆZk+1 represents the predicted lifted state at the next
time step. The matrix A ∈ Rp×p represents the Koopman vehi-
cle dynamics, and the input matrix B = [Bu, Bw] ∈ Rp×(m+l)
maps the combined vehicle inputs to the next step. This matrix
is composed of Bu ∈ Rp×m corresponds to driver commands
channel and Bw ∈ Rp×l corresponds to exogenous road inputs
(curvature) channel. Each matrix Hi ∈ Rp×p corresponds
to the i-th input channel U i
k of the combined input vector,
making the bilinear termPm+l
i=1 Hi

U i
k · Zk

an input-specific
correction to the lifted dynamics.
3) Original States Reconstruction: Based on the lifting
structure introduced in (22), the projection operation used to
recover the original system states from the predicted lifted
states is given by
ˆxk = C ˆZk, (25)
where the projection matrix C ∈ Rn×p is given by
C = [In 0], (26)
with In denoting the n × n identity matrix and 0 ∈ Rn×(p−n)
denoting a zero matrix. This projection guarantees that the
original vehicle states are exactly embedded in the lifted space
and can be retrieved without approximation.
D. Training Procedure and Loss Functions
The lifting functions and Koopman matrices are jointly
learned with the encoder parameters, Koopman transition
matrices, and bilinear interaction terms in an end-to-end deep
learning framework using backpropagation. Training is per-
formed using batched gradient descent over multiple epochs.
Each batch consists of a fixed number of trajectories randomly
sampled from the normalized dataset. During each iteration,
the encoder maps the states to a lifted state space Φθ(xk). The
lifted states vector Zk is then constructed by concatenating
Φθ(xk) with the original state vector xk, and is subsequently
used to predict the next lifted state ˆZk+1 via the Koopman
transition.
An essential aspect of the training process is designing
a well-structured loss function that effectively guides the
learning of the model dynamics. Unlike traditional Koopman
identification techniques that focus exclusively on single-step
prediction, the proposed MDBK-Net adopts a comprehensive
loss structure that balances short-term and long-term predic-
tion accuracy, following the loss formulation proposed in [30]
and [28]. Additionally, to ensure stability of the learned dy-
namics and to prevent overfitting, the framework incorporates
both a spectral stability loss and a regularization term. For
each training trajectory of length K, the loss components are
defined as follows.
The single-step loss Lssl penalizes the deviation between
the predicted ˆZk+1, computed using (24), and the ground truth
Zk+1 constructed based on (22), at each time step
Lssl = 1
K − 1
K−1X
k=1
Zk+1 − ˆZk+1

2
2
. (27)
To improve long-horizon predictive capabilities, a multi-step
prediction loss Lmsl is introduced. This loss recursively pre-
dicts the lifted states and penalizes accumulated error across
the horizon using a forgetting factor β ∈ (0, 1)
Lmsl = 1PK−1
k=1 βk
K−1X
k=1
βk
Zk+1 − ˆZ rec
k+1

2
2
, (28)
where the recursive predictions ˆZ rec
k+1 is computed by
ˆZ rec
k+1 = A ˆZ rec
k + BUk +
m+lX
i=1
Hi
h
U i
k · ˆZ rec
k
i
,
ˆZ rec
1 = Z1,
(29)
and Zk constructed by (22).
To enforce stability in the learned dynamics, a stability loss
Lsl is applied to penalize eigenvalues of the Koopman matrix
A that lie outside the unit circle.
Lsl =
X
λ∈eig(A)
max(0, |λ| − 1). (30)
To promote generalization and prevent overfitting, a regular-
ization loss Lreg is imposed on the encoder parameters and
Koopman matrices.
Lreg = λθ
X
θj ∈θ
∥θj∥2
2+λAB
 
∥A∥2
F + ∥B∥2
F

+λH
m+lX
i=1
∥Hi∥2
F ,
(31)
where ∥θj∥2 denotes the ℓ2 regularization applied to the
encoder parameters, and ∥ · ∥F represents the Frobenius norm
used to regularize the Koopman matrices. The terms λθ,
λAB, and λH are regularization weights corresponding to the
encoder parameters, linear Koopman matrices, and bilinear
interaction terms, respectively.
The total training loss is defined as a weighted combination
of the above components
Ltotal = α1 Lssl + α2 Lmsl + α3 Lsl + α4 Lreg, (32)
where the weights α1, α2, α3, α4 control the contribution of
each loss component during training. To identify the optimal
network architecture and set of optimization hyperparameters,
multiple configurations of the model were trained and evalu-
ated. The best-performing configuration was selected based
on validation performance. All associated hyperparameters,
including regularization coefficients and loss weights, are
summarized in Table I.
After computing the total loss at each iteration, backpropa-
gation is performed to update both the encoder parameters θ
and the Koopman matrices A, B, and {Hi}m+l
i=1 . The training
loop includes periodic evaluations of loss on a validation set
to monitor model performance. If no improvement is observed

8
Algorithm 1 MDBK-Net Algorithm
1: Initialize Model Parameteres θ, A, B, H,
2: Initialize Epochmax, batch size, data split, patience, lr, β,
{αi}4
i=1, Validation total loss vector Lval, best model Γ,
i ← 0.
3: Randomly partition the data into train and test sets and
normalize them.
4: while Epoch < Epoch max do
5: Randomly select a batch.
6: Encode the state vector and concatenate it with original
states as in (22).
7: Compute total loss as in (32) and its gradient.
8: Update θ, A, B, H using the computed gradient.
9: if Epoch mod 500 == 0 then
10: Increment i by 1.
11: Evaluate total loss (32) on the entire validation set
and append it to Lval.
12: if Lval
i > Lval
i−1 > · · · > Lval
i−patience then
13: Update the learning rate: lr ← lr × µ.
14: if lr = lrmin then
15: Break;
16: end if
17: else if Lval
i < Lval
i−1 then
18: Update best model: Γ ← {θ, A, B, H}.
19: end if
20: end if
21: Increment Epoch by 1.
22: end while
23: Output: Best model parameters Γ = {θ, A, B, H}
within a predefined patience window, the initial learning rate
lrinit is reduced by a factor of µ to facilitate convergence,
continuing until it reaches the minimum threshold lrmin. The
model achieving the lowest validation loss is retained as the
final configuration based on an early stopping criterion, and
the maximum number of epochs Epochmax is set accordingly.
The MDBK-Net training process, including learning schedule,
loss evaluation, and optimization criteria, is summarized in
Algorithm 1, with hyperparameters listed in Table I.
TABLE I
MDBK-N ET ARCHITECTURE AND TRAINING HYPERPARAMETERS
Hyperparameter Value
Max Number of Epochs ( Epochmax) 80,000
Data Split (Train/Test) 90%/10%
Batch Size 128
Observables State Space Dimension ( p) 66
Hidden Layer Sizes [32, 64, 128, 128, 64]
Initial Learning Rate ( lrinit) 10−3
Min Learning Rate ( lrmin) 5 × 10−7
Learning Rate Reduction factor ( µ) 0.5
Patience 2
Forgetting Factor ( β) 0.9
Loss Function Weights ( α1, . . . , α4) [0.1, 1.0, 1.6, 10−4]
Regularization Factors ( λθ, λAB, λH) 10, 1, 100
State Dimension ( n) 6
Driver Input Dimension ( m) 2
Exogenous Input Dimension ( l) 1
Time Step ( ∆t) 0.025 s
E. MDBK-Net Performance for State Prediction Evaluation
The performance of the MDBK-Net was evaluated against
two baseline models: (i) the MDK-Net algorithm as a linear
Koopman-based counterpart, and (ii) a model identified using
the classical Extended Dynamic Mode Decomposition with
Koopman (EDMDK) technique, as described in [24], [39], and
[41]. Generally, in the EDMDK framework, lifting functions
are either manually specified based on prior knowledge of
the system dynamics or empirically chosen by testing various
basis functions. Following the approach in [39], a polynomial
basis consisting of all monomials up to degree two was used to
construct the lift functions for the EDMDK baseline. To ensure
a fair comparison, the dimensionality of the lifted space in
EDMDK was aligned with that of MDK-Net and MDBK-Net.
All models were trained on the same dataset, and identical
hyperparameter settings were used for both MDK-Net and
MDBK-Net during training.
Figure 4 illustrates the state prediction results for all three
models under the same open-loop control input sequence. The
ground-truth trajectories were obtained from CarSim simu-
lations for a high-speed single-lane change scenario, during
which the driver brakes mid-maneuver. Although the EDMDK
algorithm was able to capture the dynamics of yaw rate (˙ψ) and
lateral deviation ( ey) up to a 2-second prediction horizon, it
exhibits rapidly growing errors thereafter, indicating instability
in the identified model. It also performs poorly in predicting
longitudinal and lateral velocities (vx, vy), progress gain (∆s),
and heading error ( eψ). The modeling inaccuracy is largely
attributed to the limited expressiveness of manually selected
observable functions, which lack the flexibility needed to
capture a rich Koopman-invariant subspace. As a result, the
identified Koopman model has become unstable, even with
the implementation of Tikhonov regularization during training.
This regularization technique introduces an ℓ2 penalty on the
matrix coefficients to discourage large values and improve
numerical stability [42].
In contrast, both MDK-Net and MDBK-Net learn lifting
functions through deep neural encoders, which results in supe-
rior performance over EDMDK across nearly all state predic-
tions. Their multi-step prediction capability further enhances
their ability to capture temporal dependencies, leading to more
accurate long-horizon predictions. In particular, the MDBK-
Net model achieves superior accuracy in capturing system
dynamics compared to the baseline models. This performance
gain is primarily attributed to the model’s ability to encode
bilinear interactions between control inputs and lifted states,
which will be discussed in detail through the analysis of the
bilinear coefficient matrices. To quantify prediction accuracy,
the root mean square error (RMSE) was evaluated across test
trajectories, each spanning an 80-step (2-second) horizon with
varying initial conditions. The 2-second window was selected
to ensure fairness, as EDMDK often becomes unstable beyond
this horizon, resulting in divergent predictions and invalid error
metrics. It is important to note that all RMSE values are
reported after normalizing each state using the corresponding
mean and standard deviation computed over the entire test
dataset.

9
Fig. 4. Long-term prediction results of vehicle dynamics for proposed
MDBK-Net, MDK-Net, and EDMDK. The reference trajectory for all states
are extracted from high-fidelity Carsim simulations, and the same control
input sequence is applied to all identified models. The EDMDK predictions
(green curves) exhibit divergence due to instability in the identified Koopman
matrices, resulting in values that extend beyond the vertical axis limits.
As reported in Table II, the MDBK-Net consistently
achieves the lowest RMSE across all six state variables. The
most significant improvements are observed in the lateral
dynamics, where MDBK-Net reduces the prediction error
in lateral velocity ( vy) by 43% and yaw rate ( ˙ψ) by 36%
compared to MDK-Net, and by 66% and 50%, respectively,
relative to EDMDK. Furthermore, the proposed model demon-
strates notable gains in curvilinear tracking states, with RMSE
reductions of 22% and 12% in progress gain ( ∆s) and lateral
deviation ( ey), and 40% in heading error ( eψ) relative to
MDK-Net. While MDK-Net performs comparably to MDBK-
Net in predicting longitudinal velocity ( vx), it underperforms
in capturing lateral dynamics and curvilinear positioning.
This performance gap highlights the importance of explicitly
modeling bilinear interactions between driver inputs and road
geometry, as done in MDBK-Net. By capturing these inter-
actions, MDBK-Net provides a more accurate representation
of complex lateral behavior, particularly under high-speed or
aggressive driving conditions, thereby validating the benefits
of bilinear Koopman modeling.
To further understand how these bilinearities contribute
to performance improvements, the next section analyzes the
identified bilinear matrices and their role in modeling input-
TABLE II
AVERAGE OPEN -LOOP 80- STEP (2- SECOND ) PREDICTION RMSE FOR
1,425 TEST TRAJECTORIES
State Variable MDBK-Net MDK-Net EDMDK
vx (km/h) 0.138 0.155 0.214
vy (km/h) 0.274 0.483 0.821
˙ψ (deg/s) 0.064 0.100 0.114
∆s (m) 0.133 0.171 0.207
ey (m) 0.071 0.081 0.121
eψ (deg) 0.043 0.072 0.114
specific interactions within the Koopman framework.
F . Sparsity Patterns of Bilinear Coefficient Matrices
MDBK-Net’s performance advantage can be attributed to
its ability to encode bilinear interactions between all control
inputs and lifted features. To investigate this, the sparsity
patterns of the bilinear term coefficient matrices {Hi}3
i=1,
which capture these interactions within the Koopman dynam-
ics, were examined. As shown in Fig. 5, the matrices H1
(associated with the driver steering input), H2 (longitudinal
drive command), and H3 (road curvature) reveal noticeable
bilinear dependencies influencing the evolution of states.
The sparsity patterns observed in the bilinear matrices H1
and H2 suggest that the MDBK-Net algorithm effectively
captures the influence of bilinear interactions on the lateral
velocity vy. Specifically, a prominent entry in H1 linking
the steering input to the 48th lifted state highlights a strong
nonlinear coupling in the steering dynamics that governs
lateral motion. This finding aligns with (17b), which shows
that sinusoidal functions of the steering angle regulate lat-
eral velocity. Similarly, H2 reveals interactions between the
longitudinal drive input and the 47th lifted state, affecting
both vy and ˙ψ, which correspond to the second and third
lifted states. This observation aligns with the nonlinearities
arising from tire slip dynamics under conditions approaching
handling limits, as described by (17b) and (17c), which affect
both the lateral velocity and yaw rate. Finally, H3 uncovers
bilinear contributions to the curvilinear tracking dynamics,
where the exogenous road curvature input κ interacts with
the 48th and 57th lifted states. These interactions confirm that
the progress gain ∆s and heading error eψ, corresponding
to the fourth and sixth states in the lifted subspace, exhibit
a nonlinear dependence on curvature, further validating the
modeling approach described by the Frenet-frame equations
(17d) and (17f).
These results demonstrate that the bilinear formulation ef-
fectively captures the state-input coupling, particularly during
complex high-speed maneuvers.
G. Cumulative Error Regulator (CER)
Due to the inherent approximation errors associated with
representing controlled dynamics through a finite-dimensional
Koopman operator, model mismatch occurs. This mismatch
inevitably impacts the predictive accuracy of the learned mod-
els, resulting in degraded control performance. Tracking algo-
rithms often estimate the position or state of an object based

10
Fig. 5. Visualization of bilinear Koopman matrices H1, H2, and H3, corresponding to steering input, longitudinal drive command, and road curvature,
respectively. Each matrix encodes input-specific multiplicative interactions with the observable vector. Sparsity patterns highlight how MDBK-Net captures
key nonlinear dependencies across different control channels, particularly for lateral dynamics and curvilinear tracking states.
on observations over time. As time passes, minor inaccuracies
or errors in these observations or the algorithm’s predictions
can accumulate. Instead of just tracking the current state,
dynamically estimating and compensating for accumulated
errors allows for more robust and precise tracking. In vehicle
dynamics, such accumulation of errors becomes particularly
noticeable in the tracking states of progress along the path
(S), lateral deviation ( ey), and heading error ( eψ), as these
states accumulate error over time due to their integrative
nature. While a common practice to compensate for output
tracking error involves penalizing predicted tracking errors
at each individual step, introducing an additional block ex-
plicitly designed for predicting accumulated error dynamics
and constraining this cumulative error to remain near zero
at every step allows the control system to detect long-term
deviations effectively. Consequently, the system is better able
to recognize, respond to, and compensate for model mismatch
and prediction inaccuracies.
An augmentation block within the control design, referred
to as the CER, was introduced, which is governed by the
dynamics
ek+1 = ek +

yk − yref
k

, (33)
where yk = ˆC ˆZk denotes the predicted tracking outputs (e.g.,
∆s, ey, eψ) , ˆC is the matrix mapping ˆZk to the tracking
outputs , and yref
k is the corresponding output reference
trajectory (e.g., ∆sref , ey ref , eψ ref ). By augmenting the
predicted lifted features with the states of error, an extended
lifted representation was obtained
˜Zk =
 ˆZk
ek

∈ Rp+3, (34)
which enables the controller to track error accumulation
throughout the prediction horizon and penalize deviations from
the early stages. To support this, the input is also augmented
to incorporate the desired output reference signal
˜Uk =
 Uk
yref
k

∈ Rm+l+3. (35)
The resulting augmented Koopman system, which integrates
the learned Koopman model with the cumulative error module,
is formulated as
˜Zk+1 = ˜A ˜Zk + ˜B ˜Uk +
"Pm
i=1 Hi
h
U i
k · ˆZk
i
03×1
#
, (36)
˜yk =
"
ˆxk
ek
#
= ˜C ˜Zk. (37)
where
˜A =
A 03×3
ˆC I 3

, ˜B =
 B 0p×3
03×3 −I3

,
ˆC =
03×3 I3 03×(p−6)

, ˜C =
 C 06×3
03×p I3×3

.
(38)
H. CER-MDBK-MPC
To evaluate the closed-loop performance of the augmented
Koopman model, the CER MDBK Model Predictive Con-
troller (CER-MDBK-MPC) framework was introduced. The
integration of the CER with the identified Koopman model
forms the basis of the predictive model used within the MPC
framework. As illustrated in the control block of Fig. 3, the
augmented Koopman system simultaneously propagates both
the observable dynamics and the cumulative tracking error
at each time step. This joint propagation enables the MPC
to account for accumulated deviations from the reference
trajectory over the prediction horizon N. For a given time t,
the MPC problem is formulated as a finite-horizon constrained
optimal control problem expressed as
min
ut,...,ut+N −1
t+N −1X
k=t
h
(˜yk − ˜rk)⊤ Q (˜yk − ˜rk) + uk
⊤Ruk
i
+ (˜yt+N − ˜rt+N)⊤ QN (˜yt+N − ˜rt+N)
(39a)

11
subject to ˜Zk+1 = ˜A ˜Zk + ˜B ˜Uk +
"Pm
i=1 Hi
h
U i
k · ˆZk
i
03×1
#
,
˜yk = ˜C ˜Zk,
umin ≤ uk ≤ umax,
˜Zt =
Zt
et

, ∀k = t, . . . , t+ N − 1. (39b)
The decision variables are the control inputs uk, which
include steering wheel angle (δw) and longitudinal driver com-
mand ( uζ), to be optimized. To explicitly enforce cumulative
tracking errors to approach zero, the reference signal is defined
as ˜rk = [ r⊤
k , 0⊤
1×3]⊤ where rk denotes the desired reference
trajectory. At each control step, the measured vehicle states are
first mapped into the lifted subspace Zt based on (22), and the
extended lifted representation ˜Zt is constructed as described in
(34). The optimization problem is then formulated and solved
within this augmented lifted space, yielding an optimal control
sequence {uk}t+N −1
k=t over the prediction horizon, from which
only the first control input is applied to the system at each
iteration.
It is worth noting that the same optimal control formulation
can be employed to develop a CER-MDK-MPC framework
by utilizing the trained model based on a linear Koopman
structure. This integration of CER with the previously devel-
oped MDK-Net model offers a fair comparison baseline for
evaluating the impact of bilinear terms in predictive modeling.
Due to the bilinear structure, the dynamics in (39b) result
in a non-convex optimization problem. This non-convexity
arises from the multiplicative coupling between lifted states
and control inputs in the update equation, which increases
the computational complexity of MPC. To retain convexity, a
common linearization strategy is employed, where the bilinear
Koopman dynamics are linearized by fixing the lifted state in
bilinear term to its initial value, ˆZk|t+N −1
t = Zt, throughout
the prediction horizon, as proposed in [37]. The resulting linear
dynamic approximates the behaviors of bilinear realization in
the neighborhood of the initial step evaluation. As a result, the
equality constraint enforcing the bilinear Koopman dynamic
sub-block can be updated as
ˆZk+1 = A ˆZk + BUk +
mX
i=1
Hi

Zt ui
k

, (40)
= A ˆZk + Buuk + Bwwk +
mX
i=1


pX
j=1
hijZt,j ui
k

 ,
= A ˆZk + Buuk + Bwwk +
pX
j=1
" mX
i=1
hijZt,jui
k
#
,
= A ˆZk + Buuk + Bwwk +
pX
j=1
ˆHj[Zt,j]uk,
= A ˆZk + Bwwk +

Bu +
pX
j=1
ˆHj[Zt,j]

 uk,
where Hi = [ hi1, . . . , hip], ˆHj = [ h1j, . . . , hmj], and Zt,j
is the jth component of the lifted features at initial value.
The vectors wk denote road exogenous input (curvature here),
which is treated as a known disturbance over the prediction
horizon. The matrix ˆHj[Zt,j] ∈ Rp×m denotes the aggregated
bilinear term evaluated at the initial observable vector evalua-
tion. By incorporating this approximation, the MPC problem
becomes convex and can be solved efficiently at each time
step.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS
The proposed controller is evaluated using a simulated
double lane change (DLC) scenario generated in CarSim. A
high-fidelity four-wheel vehicle model from CarSim serves as
the target plant, with road curvature data obtained via the Ad-
vanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) sensor interface.
For performance benchmarking, three baseline controllers are
considered: (i) the EDMDK-MPC controller based on the
approach in [39], (ii) an LTI-based MPC controller designed
using a state-space model identified via MATLAB’s System
Identification Toolbox, and (iii) the CER-MDK-MPC con-
troller, which augments the linear Koopman framework from
prior work [31] with the CER block. The latter enables a fair
comparison between the proposed CER-MDBK-MPC and its
linear counterpart by isolating the effect of bilinear modeling.
All controllers are evaluated under identical conditions with
a sampling time of 25 milliseconds, using the same reference
trajectory with a constant road curvature profile of κ = 0.001.
The prediction horizon N is set to 20 steps. The same optimal
control problem formulation is employed for all controllers,
with identical weighting matrices.
All controllers are evaluated on the same dSPACE
SCALEXIO DS6001 RT system, which features a 4-core CPU
with 8 MB of L3 cache. The system operates in conjunction
with CarSim RT software, utilizing the same 25 ms sampling
rate, to provide a real-time vehicle model of an all-wheel-drive
C-Class hatchback. The hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) configu-
ration is shown in Fig. 6. A Simulink model integrating both
the controller and the plant is deployed onto the SCALEXIO
hardware using dSPACE ConfigurationDesk. Communication
between the SCALEXIO system and both the CarSim RT
software and the host PC is handled via Ethernet. The CarSim
visualizer serves as the graphical interface to display real-
time vehicle behavior during testing. Figure 7 presents the
performance of all four controllers in tracking the reference
trajectory, and the RMSE of predictive controllers across
all state trajectories is provided in Table III. The LTI-MPC
exhibits poor tracking accuracy due to the limited fidelity of
the identified LTI model in the original low-dimensional state
space, despite being trained on the same dataset as the other
methods. However, CER-MDBK-MPC more closely follows
the reference trajectory across nearly all tracking states of
S, ey, and eψ, with particularly strong performance during
the second aggressive lane change maneuver, where other
approaches exhibit noticeable deviation. Table III shows that
CER-MDBK-MPC significantly reduces the tracking errors
of S, ey, and eψ by 5%, 97%, and 88% compared to
the EDMDK-MPC. Meanwhile, these tracking errors were
reduced by 35%, 77%, and 59% compared to the previously
studied MDK-MPC. The observed improvements highlight the

12
Fig. 6. Hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) setup used to evaluate the real-time perfor-
mance of each controller. The setup integrates Simulink, ConfigurationDesk,
and CarSim with the dSPACE SCALEXIO DS6001 real-time target machine.
The controllers are tested under realistic vehicle dynamics using high-fidelity
simulation and physical I/O connections.
effectiveness of the bilinear terms introduced in the proposed
framework, which enhance performance, especially when the
vehicle operates under highly nonlinear maneuvers.
For longitudinal velocity vx, both the figure and RMSE
values indicate that the proposed CER-MDBK performs com-
parably to the baseline EDMDK and CER-MDK algorithms.
This observation is consistent with the open-loop prediction
results, where the absence of significant bilinear effects in
longitudinal dynamics leads to similar performance across all
methods. In terms of lateral velocity vy, CER-MDBK achieves
performance similar to that of CER-MDK, while yielding
a 5% improvement in yaw rate tracking ˙ψ. Meanwhile, the
proposed controller improved the lateral velocity and yaw rate
tracking by 15% and 57% respectively compared to baseline
LTI method.
The proposed method achieves substantial improvements in
tracking accuracy, with up to 97% error reduction observed
in specific state variables compared to the LTI-MPC base-
line. To evaluate the overall performance of the proposed
CER-MDBK-MPC controller, the average relative reduction
in tracking error across all state variables was computed.
Compared to the CER-MDK-MPC baseline, the CER-MDBK-
MPC achieves a 33% improvement, while it outperforms
the EDMDK and LTI-based controllers by 38% and 68%,
respectively.
The CER-MDBK-MPC effectively mitigates deviations by
capturing nonlinear dynamics through its bilinear Koopman
representation. Furthermore, its cumulative error regulator
compensates for error propagation during the final stages of the
simulation. This capability is clearly illustrated by improved
lateral displacement and heading error tracking in the bottom
subplots in Fig. 7.
Figure 8 illustrates the real-time computational perfor-
mance of the CER-MDBK-MPC controller, as measured by
Fig. 7. Comparative performance of CER MDK MPC, EDMDK MPC, CER
MDBK MPC, and LTI MPC controllers during a double lane change ma-
neuver. The plots depict the evolution of vehicle states including longitudinal
velocity vx, lateral velocity vy, yaw rate ˙ψ, path progress S, lateral error ey,
and heading error eψ over time.
TABLE III
RMSE OF VEHICLE STATES WITH RESPECT TO REFERENCE TRAJECTORY
State CER-MDBK CER-MDK LTI EDMDK
vx (km/h) 0.332 0.425 0.821 0.333
vy (km/h) 0.041 0.041 0.048 0.043
˙ψ (deg/s) 0.569 0.605 1.346 0.910
S (m) 0.206 0.318 1.186 0.211
ey (m) 0.037 0.165 3.105 1.236
eψ (deg) 0.112 0.277 1.779 0.986
task turnaround time on the SCALEXIO real-time system,
compared to baseline controllers operating under a 25 ms
sampling interval. The CER-MDBK-MPC achieves an average
computation time of 0.58 ms per interval, demonstrating that
it runs over 40 times faster than a real-time application. This
is followed by CER-MDK-MPC at 0.24 ms, EDMDK-MPC
at 0.18 ms, and LTI-MPC at 0.15 ms. The computational
effort for CER-MDBK-MPC stems from the bilinear Koopman
structure, which necessitates stepwise approximations, unlike
the linear predictive structures of CER-MDK and EDMDK.
Although LTI-MPC exhibits the lowest computation time due
to its simpler, low-dimensional model, CER-MDBK-MPC

13
Fig. 8. Task turnaround time comparison of all controllers during HIL
testing over a 9.5-second simulation. Although CER-MDBK-MPC exhibits
the highest computational load ( 0.6 ms), all controllers meet real-time
requirements well below the 25 ms control step used in the experiment.
offers superior tracking accuracy, making it advantageous
for real-time, safety-critical applications that require precise
modeling of nonlinear dynamics.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a Multi-Step Deep Bilinear Koopman Net-
work was presented that jointly identifies the lifting functions
through an encoder structure and learns the corresponding
bilinear Koopman matrices. The proposed algorithm explicitly
encodes bilinear term coefficients that capture interactions be-
tween control inputs and lifted states, closely aligning with the
nonlinear cross terms of the inputs in the vehicle’s equations
of motion. To further enhance model fidelity, the approach
incorporates driver steering, throttle, and brake commands,
along with road curvature inputs, to capture nonlinearities in
the vehicle drive system and its curvilinear representation. A
comprehensive set of loss functions is employed to ensure both
short-term and long-term prediction accuracy while promoting
model stability. A Cumulative Error Regulator is integrated
into the predictive control framework to mitigate prediction
errors in tracking dynamics.
The MDBK-Net demonstrated superior prediction accuracy
in open-loop evaluations during a single lane change scenario,
outperforming baseline approaches including the MDK-Net
model and an EDMD-based Koopman model. The closed-loop
performance of the CER-MDBK-MPC was evaluated through
hardware-in-the-loop testing on a dSPACE SCALEXIO Auto-
Box RT platform, with a CarSim RT vehicle model used as
the target plant. Experimental results showed that the proposed
controller improved tracking accuracy by 33%, 38%, and
68% compared to the CER-MDK-MPC, EDMDK-MPC, and
LTI-MPC controllers, respectively. Furthermore, the controller
maintained real-time feasibility, computing control actions on
average 40 times faster than the 25 ms sampling interval.
The proposed approach highlights how deep bilinear struc-
tures can efficiently capture the nonlinear characteristics of
high-fidelity vehicle dynamics, improving modeling fidelity
within predictive control frameworks. By leveraging artifi-
cial intelligence to learn expressive yet linear representations
of complex dynamics, this work demonstrates a data-driven
methodology for achieving more accurate and safer vehicle
control. Such improvements in path-following accuracy can
directly enhance the safety of autonomous vehicles, particu-
larly during aggressive or high-speed maneuvers.
Future work will focus on extending the bilinear Koopman
modeling framework to incorporate real-time sensor noise and
disturbances, aiming to improve robustness under practical
deployment conditions. Additionally, the application of the
Koopman-based approach to more complex maneuvers such
as emergency obstacle avoidance and aggressive cornering
will be investigated. Finally, integrating domain knowledge
through physics-informed encoder structures offers a promis-
ing direction for improving model generalization and explicitly
capturing critical nonlinearities in the vehicle dynamics.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Othman, “Exploring the implications of autonomous vehicles: A
comprehensive review,”Innovative Infrastructure Solutions, vol. 7, no. 2,
p. 165, 2022.
[2] B. Paden, M. ˇC´ap, S. Z. Yong, D. Yershov, and E. Frazzoli, “A survey of
motion planning and control techniques for self-driving urban vehicles,”
IEEE Transactions on intelligent vehicles, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33–55, 2016.
[3] J. M. Maciejowski, Predictive control: with constraints . Pearson
education, 2002.
[4] M. Abtahi, M. Rabbani, and S. Nazari, “An automatic tuning mpc with
application to ecological cruise control,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 56,
no. 3, pp. 265–270, 2023.
[5] J. Xing, Z. Song, M. Cheng, Q. Gou, X. Bai, and S. Chen, “Control
of vehicle trajectory tracking under extreme conditions based on ilqr,”
in 2024 9th International Conference on Electronic Technology and
Information Science (ICETIS) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 254–258.
[6] A. Mart ´ı-Coll, A. Rodr ´ıguez-Ramos, and O. Llanes-Santiago, “An
optimization approach to select koopman observables for data-based
modeling using dynamic mode decomposition with control,” Processes,
vol. 13, no. 1, p. 284, 2025.
[7] R. Attia, R. Orjuela, and M. Basset, “Nonlinear cascade strategy for lon-
gitudinal control in automated vehicle guidance,” Control Engineering
Practice, vol. 29, pp. 225–234, 2014.
[8] S. W. Jannah and A. Santoso, “Nonlinear model predictive control for
longitudinal and lateral dynamic of autonomous car,” in 2022 11th Elec-
trical Power, Electronics, Communications, Controls and Informatics
Seminar (EECCIS). IEEE, 2022, pp. 145–148.
[9] S. A. Nugroho, V . P. Chellapandi, and H. Borhan, “Vehicle speed profile
optimization for fuel efficient eco-driving via koopman linear predictor
and model predictive control,” in 2024 American Control Conference
(ACC). IEEE, 2024, pp. 4254–4261.
[10] J. Y . Goh, M. Thompson, J. Dallas, and A. Balachandran, “Beyond
the stable handling limits: nonlinear model predictive control for highly
transient autonomous drifting,”Vehicle System Dynamics, vol. 62, no. 10,
pp. 2590–2613, 2024.
[11] S. L. Brunton and J. N. Kutz, Data-driven science and engineering: Ma-
chine learning, dynamical systems, and control . Cambridge University
Press, 2022.
[12] S. L. Brunton, M. Budi ˇsi´c, E. Kaiser, and J. N. Kutz, “Modern koopman
theory for dynamical systems,” SIAM Review, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 229–
340, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1137/21M1401243
[13] M. Bojarski, D. Del Testa, D. Dworakowski, B. Firner, B. Flepp,
P. Goyal, L. D. Jackel, M. Monfort, U. Muller, J. Zhang et al. , “End
to end learning for self-driving cars,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316 ,
2016.
[14] B. O. Koopman, “Hamiltonian systems and transformation in hilbert
space,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 17, no. 5,
pp. 315–318, 1931.
[15] M. Korda and I. Mezi ´c, “Linear predictors for nonlinear dynamical sys-
tems: Koopman operator meets model predictive control,” Automatica,
vol. 93, pp. 149–160, 2018.

14
[16] J. N. Kutz, S. L. Brunton, B. W. Brunton, and J. L. Proctor, Dynamic
mode decomposition: data-driven modeling of complex systems. SIAM,
2016.
[17] N. Takeishi, Y . Kawahara, and T. Yairi, “Learning koopman invariant
subspaces for dynamic mode decomposition,” Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.
[18] M. O. Williams, M. S. Hemati, S. T. Dawson, I. G. Kevrekidis, and
C. W. Rowley, “Extending data-driven koopman analysis to actuated
systems,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 49, no. 18, pp. 704–709, 2016.
[19] S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, and J. N. Kutz, “Discovering governing
equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical
systems,” Proceedings of the national academy of sciences , vol. 113,
no. 15, pp. 3932–3937, 2016.
[20] J. L. Proctor, S. L. Brunton, and J. N. Kutz, “Dynamic mode decom-
position with control,” SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems ,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 142–161, 2016.
[21] N. S. Selby, F. E. Sotiropoulos, and H. H. Asada, “Physics-based causal
lifting linearization of nonlinear control systems underpinned by the
koopman operator,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10980 , 2021.
[22] D. Bruder, X. Fu, and R. Vasudevan, “Advantages of bilinear koopman
realizations for the modeling and control of systems with unknown
dynamics,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 3, pp.
4369–4376, 2021.
[23] S. Yu, C. Shen, and T. Ersal, “Autonomous driving using linear model
predictive control with a koopman operator based bilinear vehicle
model,” Ifac-Papersonline, vol. 55, no. 24, pp. 254–259, 2022.
[24] V . Cibulka, T. Hani ˇs, and M. Hrom ˇc´ık, “Data-driven identification of
vehicle dynamics using koopman operator,” in 2019 22nd International
Conference on Process Control (PC19) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 167–172.
[25] V . Cibulka, T. Hani ˇs, M. Korda, and M. Hrom ˇc´ık, “Model predictive
control of a vehicle using koopman operator,” IFAC-PapersOnLine,
vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 4228–4233, 2020.
[26] M. ˇSvec, ˇS. Ile ˇs, and J. Matu ˇsko, “Model predictive control of vehicle
dynamics based on the koopman operator with extended dynamic
mode decomposition,” in 2021 22nd IEEE International Conference on
Industrial Technology (ICIT), vol. 1. IEEE, 2021, pp. 68–73.
[27] J. S. Kim, Y . S. Quan, and C. C. Chung, “Data-driven modeling and
control for lane keeping system of automated driving vehicles: Koopman
operator approach,” in 2022 22nd international conference on control,
automation and systems (ICCAS) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 1049–1055.
[28] B. Lusch, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, “Deep learning for universal
linear embeddings of nonlinear dynamics,” Nature communications ,
vol. 9, no. 1, p. 4950, 2018.
[29] Y . Xiao, X. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Liu, and J. Liu, “Deep neural networks
with koopman operators for modeling and control of autonomous
vehicles,” IEEE transactions on intelligent vehicles , vol. 8, no. 1, pp.
135–146, 2022.
[30] Y . Xiao, X. Zhang, X. Xu, Y . Lu, and J. Lil, “Ddk: A deep koopman
approach for longitudinal and lateral control of autonomous ground
vehicles,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2023, pp. 975–981.
[31] M. Abtahi, M. Rabbani, A. Abdolmohammadi, and S. Nazari, “Multi-
step deep koopman network (mdk-net) for vehicle control in frenet
frame,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03002 , 2025.
[32] I. Mezi ´c, “Spectral properties of dynamical systems, model reduction
and decompositions,” Nonlinear Dynamics, vol. 41, pp. 309–325, 2005.
[33] J. L. Proctor, S. L. Brunton, and J. N. Kutz, “Generalizing koopman
theory to allow for inputs and control,” SIAM Journal on Applied
Dynamical Systems, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 909–930, 2018.
[34] A. Mauroy, Y . Susuki, and I. Mezic, Koopman operator in systems and
control. Springer, 2020, vol. 484.
[35] B. A. H. Vicente, S. S. James, and S. R. Anderson, “Linear system
identification versus physical modeling of lateral–longitudinal vehicle
dynamics,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , vol. 29,
no. 3, pp. 1380–1387, 2020.
[36] M. Wang, X. Lou, and B. Cui, “Deep bilinear koopman realization
for dynamics modeling and predictive control,” International Journal
of Machine Learning and Cybernetics , vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 3327–3352,
2024.
[37] D. Zhao, B. Li, F. Lu, J. She, and S. Yan, “Deep bilinear koopman model
predictive control for nonlinear dynamical systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics , 2024.
[38] R. Matheson, “Study measures how fast humans react to road hazards,”
2019.
[39] J. S. Kim, Y . S. Quan, and C. C. Chung, “Koopman operator-based
model identification and control for automated driving vehicle,” Inter-
national Journal of Control, Automation and Systems, vol. 21, no. 8, pp.
2431–2443, 2023.
[40] J. S. Kim, Y . S. Quan, C. C. Chung, and W. Y . Choi, “K-smpc: Koopman
operator-based stochastic model predictive control for enhanced lateral
control of autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Access, 2025.
[41] M. ˇSvec, “Koopman operator based model predictive control of vehicle
dynamics,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Zagreb. Faculty of Electrical
Engineering and Computing . . . , 2024.
[42] G. H. Golub, P. C. Hansen, and D. P. O’Leary, “Tikhonov regularization
and total least squares,” SIAM journal on matrix analysis and applica-
tions, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 185–194, 1999.