FILE: D:\LEARNING\ZNN\ZNN\save\getPDF.pdf
PAGES: 6
TITLE_GUESS: Data-Driven Modeling and Experimental Validation of Autonomous | Vehicles using Koopman Operator | Distribution A: Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. OPSEC # 7248

INTRO_EXTRACT:
I. INTRODUCTION
Path tracking is a crucial modality of any autonomous ve-
hicle and its performance can be severely affected by choices
and assumptions made in modeling and system identification.
Kinematic and geometric path-tracking controllers like Pure-
Pursuit [2] are popular choices for low-speed applications
owing to their low computational costs and ease of im-
plementation [3]. However, such geometric/kinematic con-
trollers cannot provide adequate path-tracking performance
as operational regimes have evolved to include high-speed,
non-planar, and rough terrain application spaces.
We will focus on an exemplary case of Ackermann steered
Wheeled Mobile Robot (WMR). The critical considerations
for modeling and controller design come from the standpoint
of chassis, dynamic load transfer, and, most importantly,
*This work was supported by Clemson University’s Virtual Prototyping
of Autonomy Enabled Ground Systems (VIPR-GS), a US Army Center
of Excellence for modeling and simulation of ground vehicles, under
Cooperative Agreement W56HZV-21-2-0001 with the US Army DEVCOM
Ground Vehicle Systems Center (GVSC)
1Department
of Automotive
Engineering, Clemson
University In-
ternational Center for Automotive Research (CU-ICAR), Greenville,
SC 29607, USA. {ajoglek, csamak, tsamak, kkosara,
vkrovi}@clemson.edu
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Clemson University, Clemson,
SC 29634, USA. {ssutava, uvaidya}@clemson.edu
Fig. 1: Proposed approach involving timeseries data col-
lection of benchmark maneuvers, discovery of dynamics
using EDMD, identification of linear predictor model using
Koopman operator, formulation of linear MPC [1], and
experimental validation.
wheel-terrain interaction. In this milieu, there is rich lit-
erature highlighting vehicle models and controller design
techniques at various levels of fidelity. While approximate
linear models allow us to construct optimal and robust
control solutions [4] suitable for real-time deployment, the
unmodeled dynamics still play a significant factor in perfor-
mance and safety. These unmodeled fluctuations may arise
from multiple sources ranging from inadequate modeling
of physics phenomena (e.g. wheel terrain interaction) to
variable kinematic and dynamics parameters. High-fidelity
non-linear models have sought to capture the dynamics and
wheel-terrain interactions effectively but pose a challenge for
controller design and added computational complexity for
the predictive controllers considering real-time deployment
[5]. Additionally, physics-based models do not scale down
to small-mid scale WMRs well enough due to factors like
tires, suspension and chassis not exhibiting similar mechan-
ical and material properties. This makes developing high-
fidelity models across varied robotic platforms even more
challenging.
Traditional system identification and adaptive control ap-
proaches have been built upon a range of white- gray- or
2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
October 1-5, 2023. Detroit, USA
978-1-6654-9190-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
9442
2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) | 978-1-6654-9190-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IROS55552.2023.10341797
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Manchester. Downloaded on May 21,2026 at 12:48:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

black-box modeling techniques. However, newer approaches
like neural network-based implicit modeling of the dynam-
ics and end-to-end black box methods like deep imitation
learning and reinforcement learning [6] can implicitly cap-
ture the dynamics and control the system behavior. While
these methods provide for increased adaptability and have
been demonstrated in path tracking applications, they face
challenges like explainability, generalizability, and Sim2Real
gap.
Hence, data-driven modeling and system identification has
gained a lot of importance for merging benefits of leveraging
optimization techniques for model discovery while enabling
model analysis through their mathematical properties. In
this milieu, a prominent paradigm is the Koopman Operator
approach, where a finite-dimensional non-linear model can
be converted to an infinite-dimensional linear model through
the process of lifting. In the application domain, however,
we obtain a finite-dimensional linear predictor through the
provided data using the Extended Dynamic Mode Decom-
position (EDMD) [7] method as highlighted in Section II.
While these methodologies were traditionally applied for
discovery of dynamics in the fields of chaotic systems and
fluid flow analysis [8], studies like [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]
highlight the application of the Koopman operator theory
for optimal control and stabilization of robotic and dynamic
systems. The conventional method is to gather data based on
a kinematic/dynamic model-based simulation of the system,
obtain a linear model based on the training data, and deploy
it using a predictive/robust controller. In such scenarios, there
often exists a Sim2Real gap and dependency on the controller
and additional constraints to ensure stability. Additionally,
the specific trajectories the model has been trained on may
not effectively capture the excitation in dynamics.
In this study, we introduce a data-driven approach using
the Koopman EDMD algorithm to capture the underlying
dynamics of the F1TENTH scaled model vehicle [14]. We
conduct a series of maneuvers known for exciting vehicle
dynamics, providing insights into the platform’s character-
istics. To assess the performance of the derived model, we
employ a linear Model Predictive Control (MPC) feedback
law and compare it against the kinematic bicycle model
with Nonlinear Model Predictive Control (NMPC) in a path-
tracking problem.
