FILE: D:\LEARNING\ZNN\ZNN\save\2503.23396v1.pdf
PAGES: 21
TITLE_GUESS: Physics-Informed Adaptive Deep Koopman Operator Modeling for | Autonomous Vehicle Dynamics | Jianhua Zhanga, Yansong Hea and Hao Chena,b,∗

INTRO_EXTRACT:
1. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous driving consists of five main components: perception, decision-making, control, communication, and
vehicle dynamics modeling [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. As for low-speed scenarios, classical kinematic models are commonly
employed to capture vehicle motions [6]. However, in scenarios such as high-speed driving, tilting, drifting, etc., it is
difficult to model the vehicle dynamics accurately due to the coupling between the lateral and longitudinal motions,
as well as the strong nonlinearity of the tire characteristics. In light of the aforementioned reasons, researchers have
proposed physics-based models, including the 7 DoF (degree-of-freedom) [7], the 14-DoF [8], and even the 17-DoF
[9] to feature the behavior of vehicles in such scenarios. An increase in the degree of freedom of the model necessitates
more precise knowledge in hyper-parameters (e.g., the center of gravity, the lateral cornering stiffness of tires, the road
adhesion coefficient, etc.). This continues to be a challenging task in real events.
Data-driven methodology has exhibited satisfactory performance in modeling, optimization, and control. Re-
searchers have incorporated machine learning techniques into vehicle dynamics systems [10, 11]. The driving force
behind their work is the utilization of raw data, which is employed to train network models in order to construct vehicle
models that are approximations. For instance, Spielberg [12] adopted a neural network and trained it by collections
data on dry and icy roads to predict the road adhesion coefficient, which simplified the estimation of road adhesion
coefficient. Nevertheless, the neural network’s interpretability and generalization are insufficient because of its "black
box" nature. Besides, the developed model lacks compatibility with further controller design. Among this, Koopman
operator, named after Bernard Koopman, has received significant attention in recent years [13], where the nonlinear
system in the original space is augmented into a linear form in the lifted space through an infinite-dimensional operator
acting on system measurements. This enables the possibility of applying analysis and synthesis techniques for linear
systems to realize modeling and control of nonlinear systems. The infinite-dimensional operator is impossible to deploy
in real applications.
∗Corresponding author
202207131490@stu.cqu.edu.cn (J. Zhang); hys68@cqu.edu.cn (Y. He); h-c15@outlook.com (H. Chen)
ORCID(s): 0000-0003-4649-5507 (H. Chen)
Jianhua,Zhang et.al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 21

Physics-Informed Adaptive Deep Koopman Operator Modeling for Autonomous Vehicle Dynamics
Rowley et al. [14] first introduced Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD) to approximate the Koopman operator
by singular value decomposition (SVD). The approach was initially employed by Schmid within fluid mechanics and
has been a standard algorithm for neuroscience [15], robotics [16], and power systems [17]. However, the DMD fails
to feature nonlinearities because of its inherent linear transformations. Williams et al. [18] proposed the Extended
Dynamic Mode Decomposition (EDMD) technique as a solution. The EDMD primarily applies linear DMD logic to
the extended nonlinear basis function, which has been proven to be more effective in Koopman operator approximation.
Cibulka et al. [19] investigated the EDMD to capture vehicle dynamics, resulting in successful outcomes. Svec et al.
[20] developed a model predictive controller identified by the Koopman operator through the EDMD approach for
obtaining the optimal input in the form of longitudinal and lateral tire forces. Compared to linearization by Taylor
expansion, the Koopman operator-based model has excellent accuracy for vehicle dynamics. Besides, the selection of
nonlinear basis functions of EDMD depends on the expertise of researchers or the case-by-case basis, which impacts
the model fidelity of Koopman operator approximation and lacks generalization ability[21].
Machine Learning (ML) efficiently represents nonlinear functions and reveals promising potential in Koopman
operator approximation [22]. Many scholars incorporated ML with the Koopman operator to simulate and regulate
vehicle behaviors. Wang et al. [23] adopted the deep neural network (DNN) to construct the basis function of Koopman
operator. The trained deep Koopman operator model was then used as a predictive model to follow the desired trajectory.
The proposed controller presented superior tracking performance than the nonlinear kinematic-based model. Besides,
the deep Koopman model also exhibits good robustness. Xiao et al. [24] employed DNN-based Koopman operator to
model the dynamics of autonomous vehicle. The encoder and decoder nets were built during the training and validation,
thereby mitigating the limitations of the manual selection of basis functions. The effectiveness of this strategy in terms
of tracking accuracy and computation efficiency has been validated by experimental investigations. On the other hand,
DNN is insufficient to extract interpretable information from extensive datasets despite its remarkable performance in
a variety of contexts. In addition, autonomous vehicles operate in various scenarios with changing mass and moment of
inertial, characterized as typical time-varying systems. Generalization issues may occur when the feature is not present
in the training dataset, resulting in unexpected predictions. In recent times, there has been a growing awareness of
these points, raising the development of a new machine learning algorithm called Physics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs) [25]. PINNs makes full use of prior physical knowledge or constraints within the dataset to generate more
interpretable results, which improves the robustness of neural networks and aligns with general physical principles in
their predictions. Misyris et al. [26] applied PINNs to the power system for describing power system behavior. The
computational efficiency of rotor angle and frequency is 87 times than that of the traditional method with less data. Xu
et al. [27] used PINNs to identify the inertia and damping coefficient of unmanned surface vehicles (USV) instead of
DNN. The speed (motion) and steering dynamics of the USV are embedded into the loss function to respect physical
constraints and improve efficiency of neural network learning. The experimental results indicate that the PINNs have
better generalization ability to predict the surge, sway velocities and rotation speed than than other incumbent ML
algorithms.
Furthermore, least squares-based methods such as recursive least squares (RLS) [28], forgetting factor recursive
least squares (FFRLS) [29], and sliding window least squares (SWLS) [30], are able to estimate time-varying
parameters in real-time. Towliat et al. [31] introduced a multi-layer RLS estimator for fast time-varying systems.
By eliminating erroes from previous layer, the estimation accuracy is improved. Besides, this method also offers a
moderate computational complexity. Wang et al. [32] proposed FFRLS to addresses data fluctuations caused by various
factors during battery operation. It is verified that the FFRLS has more accurate estimations and stable performance
on parameter identification. Retianza et al. [33] presented a SWLS method to compensate current sensor errors and
mitigate computational load, while ensuring accuracy in highly dynamic three-phase electric drives.
Motivated by these efforts, this study introduces a physical loss function term from the concept of PINNs during
Koopman operator approximation, i.e., the acceleration loss between neural network output and sensor measurement,
to extract the interpretable information of the dataset. Moreover, to improve the adaptive capability of the autonomous
vehicle model based on the deep Koopman operator, the SWLS algorithm is employed to online update system matrices
in the lift space with comparisons to the RLS and FFRLS. Therefore, the main contributions of this paper can be
concluded as:
(1) Introducing PINNs into the deep Koopman operator framework, and adding a physics-informed loss, i.e.,
acceleration loss, to improve the efficiency of network learning and its interpretability. This enhances the accuracy
of deep Koopman operator approximation and modeling accuracy of autonomous vehicle dynamics.
Jianhua,Zhang et.al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 21

Physics-Informed Adaptive Deep Koopman Operator Modeling for Autonomous Vehicle Dynamics
(2) Using SWLS to update the system matrices in the lifted space augmented by the deep Koopman operator in a real-
time manner; selecting an appropriate window size that can balance the impact of outdated historical and current
data. This enforces the deep Koopman operator model adaptive to the time-varying dynamics of autonomous
vehicles.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of the concept of Koopman
operator, deep Koopman operator, and SWLS. Section 3 elaborates on the physics-informed deep Koopman model for
autonomous vehicle dynamics, including the proposed acceleration loss added into network training and the online
update system matrices in the lifted space by SWLS. The simulation tests and comparative studies are conducted and
discussed on the various scenarios in Section 4, and conclusions are summarized in Section 5.
