FILE: D:\LEARNING\ZNN\ZNN\save\A_Scientifically_Experimental_Approach_to_the_Simulation_of_Designer_Activity_in_the_Conceptual_Designing_of_Software_Intensive_Systems.pdf
PAGES: 17
TITLE_GUESS: Received May 13, 2013, accepted June 26, 2013, date of publication July 25, 2013, date of current version August 6, 2013. | Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2013.2274896 | A Scientifically Experimental Approach to the

INTRO_EXTRACT:
I. INTRODUCTION
In reality, designing SISs has been associated with a very low
degree of a success (approximately 35%) for years [1]. Such
a state of affairs is caused basically by the insufﬁciency of
reliable ways-of-working used by a team of designers under
the conditions of a complicated computerized environment.
Insufﬁcient reliability is a consequence of many problems, the
main source of which is the existing experience of software
engineering in the context of its application to the design
of SISs.
A promising attempt at positive re-founding of software
engineering is bound with an SEMAT initiative (Software
Engineering Methods And Theory initiative) in documents
for which a way-of-working used by designers is marked as
a very important essence [2]. There, ‘‘way-of-working’’ is
deﬁned as ‘‘the tailored set of practices and tools used by a
team to guide and support their work.’’
The description above indicates that ways-of-working are
very important objects of scientiﬁc investigations aimed at
predicting results. It is our deep belief that investigations of
this type should be fulﬁlled not only for the subject area
of designing the SISs as a whole but in every project that
involves SISs as well. In the design of a speciﬁc SIS, the
research of the used way-of-working should be necessarily
fulﬁlled by the team of designers.
It is necessary to clarify the proposed position. Way-of-
working, when used in the design of a deﬁnitive SIS, should
be created step-by-step, and the steps should include research
conducted by a designer or by a designers’ group in the form
of a scientiﬁc experiment. If such experiments are aimed
at simplifying the complexity of the collaborative work of
the designers, then their inclusion to way-of-working will
facilitate achieving success in the design of SIS.
In general, the complexity (or simplicity) of SIS reﬂects
the degree of difﬁculty for designers in their interactions with
speciﬁc models of SIS (or its components) in solving spe-
ciﬁc tasks. The system or its components are complex if the
designer (interacting with the system) does not have sufﬁcient
resources to achieve the necessary level of understanding or
to achieve the other planned aims.
Often, various interpretations of the Kolmogorov mea-
sure [3] are applied for estimations of the degree of the
system’s complexity. This measure is connected with the
minimal length of program P that provides the construction
of system S from its initial description D. Distinctions in
interpretations are usually caused by features of the system
S and formal descriptions to be used for objects P and D.
In accordance with their destinations, for the programs of
P-type, it is more preferable to build them as programmable
systems of designers’ actions while using the speciﬁc
methods of meta-programming M. Explicit and/or implicit
methods for managing the designers’ activity are used in the
technology behind SIS design. The reality of such manage-
ment demonstrates that the complexity of a P-program is no
488
2169-3536 
 2013 IEEE
VOLUME 1, 2013

P. Sosnin: Scientifically Experimental Approach to the Simulation of Designer Activity
less than the complexity of SIS in any of its used states.
Moreover, any M-program that provides the construction of
a P-program should be built on the basis of the same initial
description D of the system S. It can be presented by the
following chain: D(t0) →M(ti) →P(tj) →S(tn).
Named relations between constructions D, M, and P can
be used by designers to divide the process of designing into
stages [D(t0) →M0 →P0 →S(t1)], [D(t1) →M1 →P1 →
S(t2)], . . . , [D(ti) →Mi →Pi →S(ti+1)], . . . , [D(tn−1) →
Mn−1 →Pn−1 →S(tn)], where a set {S(ti)} reﬂects the states
of the SIS that are being created.
Dividing the designing process into stages is a typical step
in any modern technology that involves the creation of SISs.
In different technologies, such an approach is used in different
forms for different aims. This approach helps to decrease the
complexity of the interactions with SIS in any of its states
S(ti). However, until now, the viewpoint of programming on
the designer activity has not been supported instrumentally in
the early design stages.
It is necessary to note that the creation of instrumental
means for an explicit work with M- and P-type artifacts
essentially depends on their understanding. In an approach
described in this paper, these artifacts are understood as
models of designers’ behavior that are created for scien-
tiﬁc experimentation on the corresponding behavior units
included in the way-of-working. Therefore, the indicated
instruments should have the potential for the creation and
use of the artifacts of M- and P-types in experiments with
behavioral units of designers’ activity. Moreover, the means
of supporting the experimental work should help the design-
ers create solutions for investigating tasks and opening the
possibility for their conﬁrmatory reuse in the designers’
team.
The speciﬁcity of the approach is deﬁned by the following
features.
1. The investigated units of behavior are interpreted as
precedents, with which the designers interact, using
accessible experience and its models.
